---
id: MECW30-008
title: "Contents of the Manuscript"
volume: 30
doc_type: article
status: raw
---

||VI-219b| Contents of notebook VI:

5. Theories of Surplus-Value

(a) Sir James Steuart

(b) The Physiocrats

(c) Adam Smith |VI-219b||

||VII-272b| [Contents of notebook VII]

5. Theories of Surplus-Value

(c) Adam Smith (continuation)

(Inquiry into how it is possible for the annual profit and wages to buy the annual commodities, which besides profit and wages also contain constant capital) |VII-272||

||VIII-331b| [Contents of notebook VIII]

5. Theories of Surplus-Value

(c) Adam Smith (conclusion) |VIII-331b||

||IX-376b| [Contents of notebook IX]

5. Theories of Surplus-Value

(c) Adam Smith. Conclusion

(d) Necker |IX-376b||

||X-421c| [Contents of notebook X]

5. Theories of Surplus-Value

Digression. Quesnay's Tableau économique

(e) Linguet

(f) Bray

(g) Herr Rodbertus. Digression. New theory of rent: |X-421c||

||XI-490a| [Contents of notebook XI]

5. Theories of Surplus-Value

(g) Rodbertus/p>

Digression. Note on the history of the discovery of the so-called Ricardian law

(h) Ricardo

Ricardo's and Adam Smith's theory of cost-price (refutation)

Ricardo's theory of rent

Tables, with elucidation, of differential rent |XI-490||

||XII-580b| [Contents of notebook XII]

5.Theories of Surplus-Value

(h) Ricardo

Table, with elucidation, of differential rent

(Observations on the influence of the change in value of means of subsistence and raw material — therefore also in the value of machinery—on the organic composition of capital)

Ricardo's theory of rent

Adam Smith's theory of rent

Ricardo's theory of surplus-value

Ricardo's theory of profit |XII-580b||

||XIII-670a| [Contents of notebook XIII]

5. Theories of Surplus-Value, etc.

(h) Ricardo

Ricardo's theory of profit

Ricardo's theory of accumulation. Critique of this (development of crises from the basic form of capital)

Ricardo's Miscellanea. Conclusion of Ricardo (John Barton)

(i) Malthus |XIII-670a||

||XIV-771a| [Contents of notebook XIV and plan of further chapters of *Theories of Surplus-Value*]

5. Theories of Surplus-Value

(i) Malthus

(k) Decline of the Ricardian school (Torrens, James Mill, Prevost, polemical writings, McCulloch, Wakefield, Stirling, John Stuart Mill)

(l) Adversaries of the economists

(Bray as adversary of the economists)

(m) Ramsay

(n) Cherbuliez

(o) Richard Jones. (End of this Part 5)

Episode: Revenue and its sources |XIV-771a||

||XV-862a| [Contents of notebook XV]

5. Theories of Surplus-Value

1. Proletarian opposition on the basis of Ricardo

2. Ravenstone. Conclusion

3. [and] 4. Hodgskin

So-called amassment as a mere phenomenon of circulation (Stocks, etc.—circulation reservoirs)

(Compound interest; fall in the rate of profit based on this)

Vulgar political economy

(Interest-bearing capital. Existing wealth in relation to the movement of production)

(Interest-bearing capital and commercial capital in relation to industrial capital. Older forms. Derivative forms)

(Development of interest-bearing capital on the basis of capitalist production)

(Usury. Luther, etc.). |XV-862a||