---
id: MECW42-343
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 23, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 March 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] Museum,[1] 23 MARCH 1868

*IN HASTE*

DEAR FRED,

I thought Laura would notify you about the £40. She claims, however, that I did not ask her to. Thus *malentendu[2] * During the whole of last week I had many bleeding shingles; particularly obstinate and hard to obliterate the mess under my left armpit. But GENERALLY I feel much better, IN FACT like a RFcoNVAi.EscENT and I am sure that the business is coming to an end.

At the same time, I am sending you the Schweitzer, which please return to me after use. A few lines from Meissner, in which he notifies me of his stupidity in informing Schweitzer that he should not continue with his EXTRACTS[3] until / have stated my views. *Quelle bêtise![4] * I immediately attempted to redress things. Whatever secondary motives Schweitzer may have (e.g. to annoy old Hatzfeldt, etc.), one thing must be admitted. Although he makes a MISTAKE here and there, he has studied the stuff really hard, and knows where the centres of gravity lie. Such a 'base consciousness' is still preferable to the 'honest consciousness' of a Heinzen or the 'noble consciousness' of a Wilhelmchen.[5] Hegel forgot to list *idleness* as an essential element of 'noble-minded consciousness'.[6]

More *de diversis[7] * in the next letter. *Salut.*

Your

K. M.