---
id: MECW42-288
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, November 26, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "26 November 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 26 November 1867

Dear Moor,

I have not received the promised letter *in quo tua res agebatur.*[1]

Meissner's proposal to send out new notices with excerpts from the reviews was what I had in mind to suggest to you as soon as Siebel's articles (i.e. the ones I gave him)[2] appear. The excerpt from the *Zukunft* is quite good,[3] but a few more would be even better; he should send you the whole caboodle, and you can then prepare a notice from it. Or if you do not wish to, then he can send it to *me* and I will do it. I was most struck by the fact that the first notice *took up precisely the same space* as the one for my little pamphlet,[4] and it had not a word of commentary with it.[5]

If the matter does not turn out differently soon, then I shall have to write—with your consent OF COURSE—to Meissner and offer him articles written by *myself* for newspapers to be specified by him. I am sure that could not compromise you.

I have just managed to convey Meissner's excuses to Siebel^1S1 before the post office closed. They are admittedly persuasive, Siebel was at the time AT A VERY LOW EBB and only recovered in Honnef.

You will have received my letter of Sunday with the returned letters. The tanner[6] returned enclosed, *autodidactum integrum,* which does not, however, mean that other nations are incapable of bringing forth such a tanner. Philosophy, which in Jakob Böhme's day was just a shoemaker, is making progress when it assumes the shape of a tanner.

How is the carbuncle? I do not like its location, I hope Lafargue has lanced it for you. A stop really must be put to this business.

Has Borkheim paid you the money? He has not written a word to me, although I am guarantor.[7]

Your

F. E.