---
id: MECW42-255
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 11, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "11 September 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 11 September 1867

DEAR FRED,

Regarding the 'transatlantic Ocean', it is a matter for the final corrector to put right such *lapsus pennae*.[2] I see that the *Zukunft* has reprinted this splendid 'flow' along with the greater part of the preface.[3]

The translation in *The Bee-Hive*[4] is by Eccarius. I believe that most of the errors stem not from him, but, because of his bad hand-writing, from *The Bee-Hive's* CORRECTORS. I would naturally have preferred you to do the translation. However, as Eccarius offered his services *de prime abord,*[5] and is now on the staff of *The Bee-Hive,* that was not feasible.

I shall personally deliver the coup de grâce to those Proudhonist jackasses at the next congress in Brussels. I have DIPLOMATICALLY MANAGED the whole affair and did not want to COME OUT *personally* before my book appears and our Association is firmly rooted. By the by, I shall give them a caning in the OFFICIAL REPORT of the GENERAL COUNCIL (despite all their efforts, the Parisian wind-bags were unable to prevent our re-election)[6].

MEANWHILE our Association has made great progress. The wretched *Star,* which wanted to ignore us entirely, announced in its leading article yesterday that we are more important than the PEACE CONGRESS.[7] Schulze-Delitzsch could not prevent his ' *Workers** *****Association** in Berlin from joining us.[8] Those wretches from among the English TRADE UNIONISTS, who think we are too 'extreme', are coming flocking. Besides the *Courrier français,* there have been reports on our congress in Girardin's *Liberté, Siècle, Mode, Gazette de France,* etc. *Les choses marchent*[9] And when the next revolution comes, and that will perhaps be sooner than might appear, *we* (i.e., you and I) will have this mighty ENGINE *at our disposal.* COMPARE WITH THIS THE RESULTS OF MAZZINFS, ETC, OPERATIONS SINCE 30 YEARS! And with no money to boot! And with the intrigues of the Proudhonists in Paris, Mazzini in Italy and the jealous Odger, Cremer, Potter in London, with the Schulze-Delitzsch and the Lassalleans in Germany! We can be well satisfied!

My children arrived back safe and in good spirits with Lafargue yesterday.[10] He has brought an enormous crystal goblet (holds IV2 POTS) back with him for you. He appears to be impressed with your 'transatlantic Ocean'.

In these days, Lafargue would like to visit you for 3 days at this time before his lectures begin again. The most awkward thing about it is that he is demanding (of course, not being IN THE SECRET OF MY MONEY-AFFAIRS) that I should accompany him, and I have not yet found a satisfactory excuse for turning down this tour, which I just cannot manage.

I am exceedingly vexed with Meissner. He has wasted weeks in bringing out the book. Why?

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

2nd letter from Lessner enclosed.[11]

Apropos. Our plump poet's[12] begging-campaign, which, *vide*[13] the latest *Hermann,*[14] is not proceeding quite as desired, has had one good result.[15] Kätchen of the sturdy calves[16] is to get married. Notice of betrothal to A CERTAIN Kröker (a most poetic name) in the *Zukunft*[17]