---
id: MECW42-083
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 13, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 May 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 157; First published: abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Berlin, 1930."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 13 May 1865**

**Dear Fred**,

The £5 received with **thanks**. Will be invested as suggested.

You are right about the **Committee in Manchester**.

*Quoad* E. Jones, it is necessary to march with him for the time being. He and his people will be figuring at the next Manchester **Conference** (**next Tuesday**) together with our **delegates** (Odger and Cremer **on the part of the International Association**), Howell as secretary of the **Reform League** (**Bricklayer, one of the members of our Council**) and Beales and Mason Jones as bourgeois representatives of the same **League**.

Without us this **Reform League** would never have come into existence, or else it would have fallen into the hands of the **middleclass**. The glorious failure of **Baines's Bill** (which will result in a **change of Ministry** and the **coming in** of the Tories), originally **supported by the Government, which wanted some such small measure for the hustings**, occurred in the Lower House itself with direct reference to the 'extravagant' demands recently put up by the **working class** (**i.e. our men**).

As Dronke wrote me, Reinach I, who is now **Managing Director** of the **Bank of Switzerland**, will be ruthlessly putting an end to the **office** in London, which is causing nothing but expenses. Reinach I is, of course, not bound by the same political and personal considerations as Fazy and Klapka were.

A ghastly carbuncle has broken out again on my left hip, **near** the **inexpressible part of the body**.

Regards to **Mrs Lizzy**.

*Salut.*

Your
K. M.

Apropos. Monsieur Le Lubez, who had miscalculated about how important and dangerous he is, **wants now to return to the Central Council in the capacity of a representative 'for Greenwich'**! We replied that *d'abord* we had to wait for certain letters to come, which he had written to France at the time of the **conflict**.

I hardly think the *Social-Demokrat* will see out another quarter. Moses believed himself safely ensconced and didn't want to give up his prestigious position as Lassalle's really secret agent at any price. *Le pauvre diable!*

Lassalle's will is now proven. He has left **nothing** to B. Becker apart from his '**nomination',** accompanied by rules of conduct dictated 'with all severity and authority'.