---
id: MECW42-251
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, September 2, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "2 September 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX^10

IN LONDON

Manchester, 2 September 1867

Dear Moor,

The *£5* banknote enclosed. You will have received the booklet 'TRANSACTIONS' [OF THE] R[OYAL] SOCIETY.^4M Can you send me the July and August *Free Presses,* as promised?

Things appear to have taken a very sharp turn in Paris; every day all the papers are following Girardin's example in recalling 1829 and 1847,[1] and the Lille speech, full of resignation, appears to prove that there is nothing to be done in South Germany and Austria *precisely now* when he[2] needs it, obviously solely in consequence of the sorry state of the latter. 'And hence' it is only 'weak governments' which incline to use foreign conflicts as a means of avoiding internal difficulties.[3] Then, the constantly reiterated allusions to *mon fils*[4] do not appear to imply any very significant confidence in the longevity of the *père quem nuptiae demonstrant*[5] either. You must press ahead with the second volume,[6] things may soon start to happen.

On Saturday I saw a Californian newspaper, which suggested the 8 HOURS-MOVEMENT must have had an enormous impact amongst the BUILDING TRADES there. The MASTERS are forming a 10-HOURS- ASSOCIATION to oppose it and are setting up a considerable wailing. Contracts for *l'/'**2***** million dollars are said to have been withdrawn as a result of the 8 HOURS business.[7] **

Gumpert is back and says that in Electoral Hesse the rage at the Prussians is as furious as in Hanover, though less demonstrative. The moment the military were to leave, every 'Prussian' would be slaughtered. Amongst other things the Prussians have confiscated the officers' widows and pension fund in Kassel which derived from *compulsory contributions from the officers.* He found things even hotter in Hanover than I did.

Kugelmann also wanted to attend the Lausanne Congress,[8] i.e., as a SPECTATOR, perhaps it would be a good thing to inform Eccarius of this. He will probably encounter Schorlemmer, who left yesterday (via Grimsby), at the Naturalists' Congress in Frankfurt.

Moore is travelling to Thuringia in approx. 3 weeks, to learn German for 6 weeks; I have sent him off there so that he may get off the TRACK of the BRITISH TOURISTS. Kindest regards.

Your

F. E.