---
id: MECW42-121
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 5, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "5 January 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 212; First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 5 January 1866**

**Dear Fred**,

*In the greatest of haste.*

Best thanks for the £10.

The bill of exchange falls due on 18 February, and is for £48. I wanted the **landlord** to draw it only for the 2 terms that were due and not for the third one as well, which is not due until the end of January. But he insisted.

A plot has been hatched against the **International Association** in which connection I need your co-operation. Further details later. For the moment, suffice to say: Mr Le Lubez and Vesinier (the latter well aware that an **Inquiry** into his past is in progress; he is in Brussels again) have a French branch here (**in fact** an opposition branch); Longuet, the editor of *Rive gauche,* also belongs to it, and it is tied up with all that pack of Proudhonists in Brussels. Vesinier began by publishing a long screed against us in the *Echo de Verviers,* **of course anonymously**. Then, in the *same* paper which is putting out the **slanders** against our Association (among other things, falsely calls Tolain and Fribourg Bonapartists, too), the London **Branch** published a programme, a draft of future statutes, which *they,* the Faithful, are going to put to the Congress.

The real crux of the controversy is the *Polish question.* The fellows have all attached themselves to the Muscovitist line pursued by Proudhon and Herzen. I shall therefore send you the earlier articles by the oracles in the *Tribune du Peuple* against Poland and you must do a refutation, either for our papers in Geneva (the 'German' one) or for *The Workman's Advocate.* The Russian gentlemen have acquired some bran-new allies in the Proudhonised section of 'Jeune France'.

Your
K. M.