---
id: MECW42-134
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 20, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "20 February 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p 231;. First published: in Marx and Engels, Works, Moscow, 1963."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 20 February 1866**

Dear **Fred**,

You can imagine how opportunely the £10 came. I had been served with two threats of distraint, for £6 "0" 9d. for the bloody municipal **taxes**, and for 1sh. 16d. for the **Queen's taxes**. And I had until Friday to pay.

As regards the carbuncles, the position is:

Concerning the *upper one*, from my long practical experience I was able to tell you that it really needed *lancing*. Today (Tuesday), after receiving your letter, I took a sharp razor, a **relict of Dear** Lupus, and *lanced the cur myself.* (I cannot abide doctors meddling with my private parts or in their vicinity. Furthermore, I have Allen's testimony **that I am one of the best subjects to be operated upon**. I always recognise *what has to be done.)* The *sang brûlé*, **as Mrs Lormier says**, Spurted, or rather leapt, right up into the air, and I now consider this carbuncle buried, although **it still wants some nursing**.

As far as the *lower* cur is concerned, it is becoming malignant and is *beyond* my control and kept me from sleeping the whole night through. If this diabolical business advances, I shall have to send for Allen, of course, as, owing to the *locus* of the cur, I am unable **to watch and cure** it myself. And in general it is clear that **on the whole** I know more about carbuncular complaints than most doctors.

And by the by, I still hold to the view that I *suggested* to Gumpert during my last **stay** in Manchester: that is, that the itching and scratching between my testis and posterior over the past 2 1/2 years and the consequent *peeling of the skin* have been more aggravating to my constitution than anything else. The business started 6 months before the first monster carbuncle which I had on my back, and it has persisted *ever since.*

My dear **boy**, in all these circumstances one appreciates **more than ever** the good fortune of a friendship such as exists between ourselves. You should know for your part that there is no relationship I value so highly.

I will send you 'Zaches' and '**Factory Reports**' tomorrow. You will understand, my **Dear Fellow**, that in a work such as mine, there are bound to be many **shortcomings** in the detail. But the *composition,* the structure, is a triumph of German scholarship, which an individual German may confess to, since it is **in no wayhis** merit but rather belongs to the nation. Which is all the more gratifying, as it is otherwise the **silliest nation** under the sun!

The fact, which Liebig had 'denounced' and which prompted Schönbein's investigations, was this:

The *upper* layers of the soil always contain more ammonia than the *deeper* ones, instead of containing less of it as they would have to do if they had lost it through cultivation. The *fact* was recognised by every chemist. Only the cause was *unknown*.

Hitherto, decay was considered to be the sole source of ammonia. All chemists (including Liebig) denied that the nitrogen in the air could serve as a nutrient for plants.

Schönbein proved (by experiment) that any flame burning in the air converts a certain quantity of the nitrogen in the air into ammonium nitrate, that every process of decomposition gives rise to both nitric acid and ammonia, that the mere evaporation of water is the means causing the formation of both plant nutrients.

Finally, Liebig's 'jubilation' at this discovery:

'The combustion of a pound of coal or wood restores to the air not merely the elements needed to reproduce this pound of wood or, under certain conditions, coal, but the process of combustion in *itself'* (note the Hegelian category) 'transforms a certain quantity of nitrogen in the air into a nutrient indispensable for the production of bread and meat.

**Feel proud of the Germans. It is our duty to emancipate this 'deep' people**.

Your
K. M.