---
id: MECW42-317
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, January 10, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 January 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 10 January 1868

Dear Moor,

I wanted to write to you at length today, but the intervention of a Serb and a Wallachian, who held me up for hours, has frustrated my plans. Moreover, yesterday I had a visit from the ex-dictator Amand Goegg, who is travelling for the ridiculous Peace League[1] and who ruined my evening. Luckily, Schorlemmer also happened by, and got the surprise of his life with this fossil of Federal Republic; he had not believed such a thing possible. The stupid oaf has become ten times more stupid through the unthinking repetition of the same phrases, and has lost all points of contact with the world of common sense (not to mention actual thinking). Apart from Switzerland and the Canton of Baden, there is still nothing else in the world for people of this sort. For all that, he soon convinced himself of the truth of your first reply to his application for support: that the further apart we lived and the less we had to do with one another, the better we would get on. He admitted that in the Vogt affair[2] Blind had behaved like a *coward,* but said he was after all a worthy fellow, and even threatened to reconcile you and Blind! Vogt—no politician, but a worthy fellow, honest to the backbone, who simply scribbled away in the daytime without considering the content—if we 2 spent an hour together then we would be like brothers; he admitted him to be a Bonapartist, but not a paid one. To which I replied that *all* Bonapartists were paid, there were no unpaid ones, and if he could show me an unpaid *one,* then I would accept the *possibility* that Vogt was not paid; otherwise I would not. This astonished him, but finally he discovered one—*Ludwig Bamberger]* Incidentally, he said that Vogt had continually had a very hard time, his wife was a peasant girl from the Bernese Oberland, whom he had married *out of virtue* after he had made her a baby. Vogt, the artful dodger, appears to have pulled the wool well over this jackass's eyes. But when Schorlemmer and I explained to him that Vogt had not produced anything as a natural scientist either, you should have seen his rage: Had he not *popularised?* Was not that worth while?

I shall write something for *Vienna* as soon as it is in any way possible. Additionally for the *Fortnightly,*;[3] but I would need to know first whether it could be made into a longer article, or should only be a short notice like those at the back of the *Fortnightly.* Beesly should be sounded out about this[4] a short notice would be *almost useless* and Beesly himself would learn nothing about the book from it.

I shall call Wilhelmchen[5] to account in a few days time about fulfilling the promises he made me: we shall make this little fellow get a move on. I have Richter's address.

Herewith returned Liebknecht, Kugelmann and Siebel. Best greetings.

F. E.