---
id: MECW42-014
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 24, 1864"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 November 1864"
year: 1864
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 24 November 1864]

Dear FREDHUCK,

Letter from the old Hatzfeldt woman enclosed, which I would like sent back *by return.*

Also enclosed the letter from the man in Solingen[1] which has turned up again, and Schweitzer's letter.

I sent off 3 'Addresses'[2] to you today, 1 for yourself, 1 for Gumpert and 1 for Ernest Jones. If you can distribute some more anywhere (gratis), you only have to ask.

As for Schweitzer, I have written—not to him but to Liebknecht—that we both dislike the company, but we intend FOR A NONCE to adopt *bonne mine à mauvais jeu,*[3] but to *disown* them *immediately* as soon as they do anything silly. I also ask why Bûcher and especially *Rodbertus* are not among them![4]

Moses[5] and Herwegh (who are, incidentally, of some stature, compared with B. and Ph. Becker, IN A LITERARY SENSE) are, after all, more highly regarded by people in Germany than by us. At least, one cannot publicly denigrate them, as one can fellows like Grün, etc.

In great haste. *Salut.*

Your

K. M.

I have just been obliged to write long letter to the old woman[6] to extricate myself from the Blind affair she has tried to involve me in. Student Blind has, of course, not let the opportunity slip by of puffing himself up, by issuing a 'protest' in the name of the Republic[7] and selecting a few passages from Lassalle's speeches which are indeed quite sickeningly royalist.[8] Also to advise her against reproducing the 'wanted' portraits of her enemies.[9]