---
id: MECW42-106
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 8, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 November 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 November 1865
1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park,
Haverstock Hill

Dear FREDERICK,

I arrived here on Friday[1] evening. Strohn had pressed me very strongly to spend some days with him, but I had too much on my mind. I knew things were awry in London and thus wanted to be on the spot.

The DISAPPOINTMENTS MRS Lizzy[2] prophesied for me came true with a vengeance. *D'abord,*[3] on arrival at King's Cross,[4] my case had gone, and I still have not got it back even now, which is particularly annoying because of the 'papers' it contained, for which I am responsible. Then I found my child[5] was still very unwell. Finally, the LANDLORD had been round, had made threats, and my wife had only calmed him down with *promises of my return.* The man talked of putting the **BROKER** into the house and also of terminating the LEASE, which the contract admittedly entitles him to do. All the other riff-raff appeared in the LANDLORDS wake, some of them in person, and some in the form of threatening letters. I found my wife so DESOLATE that I *had not the COURAGE* to explain the TRUE STATE OF THINGS to her. And I *really do not know what to dol* And we also have to get coals in, etc.

As well as these DISAPPOINTMENTS ONE GOOD NEWS. One of the two aunts in Frankfurt (the one who is 73,[6] the other[7] is two years younger) has passed on, but *ab intestato*[8] (being afraid of dying if she should make a will). I shall therefore have to share with the other heirs, which would not have been so if there had been a will, as she cared nothing for the others. And then another pleasant circumstance—we have to wait for the power of attorney from Mr Juta from the CAPE OF GOOD HOPE.

All these pleasant circumstances have rather gone to my stomach, so that I at once had myself made up some more of Gumpert's medicine.

*Salut* (to MRS Lizzy, too).

Your

K. M.