---
id: MECW42-065
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 11, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 March 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 March[1] 1865

Dear Moor,

Schweitzer's brazenness really is ludicrous. But it does show how hard he has been hit by our withdrawal,[2] and how well he knows that *very much* depends on it for his petty paper. After Herwegh and Rüstow have come out in *support* of our statement[3] anything can happen. Schweitzer will soon become aware of the effect his big talk has had, especially on the Rhine. Siebel has done a capital job in circulating the pamphlet.[4] The *Bonner Zeitung* has twice published long extracts already and is intending to produce still more. The *Rheinische Zeitung*[5] has also got a long extract as well. Our standing with the Rhineland workers being what it is, this agitation-by-clique against us won't get very far.

Siebel had already sent me the little piece from the *Neue Frankfurter Zeitung.*[6] Student Blind as always. He is having to make a couple of phrases of Lassalle's last a whole year. I haven't received the *lackey*[7] yet.

The legacy business is complete, the LAWYER will send the statement of account next week, he has still got approx. 10s. to collect in or pay out, he wasn't sure which. So, I can send you the money on Monday then.[8] Meanwhile, *my* statement of account enclosed, according to which another £9 approx. are due to you.

The ideas Liebknecht has about Manchester! He has got nothing to gobble and asks me what a house **with garden** costs here! The fellow is simply soft in the head. Schweitzer, he said, *could* not sell himself to Bismarck because he would have been *obliged* to use the good offices of the beastly old woman.[9]

I'm finding the new movement a terrible fag, by the way. It's the devil's own job letter-writing in the evening as well for the party and publisher, etc., until 1 or 2 o'clock, after letter-writing all day at work.

Siebel has sent me Lange's pamphlet.[10] Confused, Malthusian with some Darwinian ingredients, flirting with all and sundry, but several good passages against Lassalle and the bourgeois consumers' co-op fellows. I'll send it to you in the next few days.

Schily's letter also returned enclosed which I found most entertaining. Our old comrade is turning himself into a very useful diplomat.[11] How did the two of you settle the dispute?

It's impossible to get anywhere with Jones. Hardly are the SESSIONS over when the Assizes begin. THE TRADE IN CRIME SEEMS HIGHLY FLOURISHING.

*Adios,* and my kindest regards to the LADIES.

Your

F. E.

EXECUTION of Will W. Wolff

*Debit*

Payment from Steinthal & Co. incl. interest     £1,083-9-3
"        "        " Heywood BROTHERS incl. interest     "   234-14-9
Debts collected by Dr Borchardt     "     66-13-0

£1,384-17-0

*Credit*

To payment TO MARX     £234-14-9
"     "        " do     " 350-0-0
"     "        " do     " 200-0-0
"     "        " do     "   40-0-0

£824-14-9

" to Borchardt     £ 100-0-0
" Schiller Institute"[12] 100-0-0
" Engels     " 100-0-0
" Wood, Solicitor     " 150-0-0
fPayment to LANDLORD     "   13-4-9
Paid funeral expenses     "   57-11-0
by Borchardt M of 2 bills     "     1-2-4
by Borchardt % of PROBATE DUTY     "   30-0-0

1,376-12-10

Balance     8-4-2

There is also a certain amount in interest I have got to make over to you for the period from 9 November (when I received the balance of approx. £633 from Steinthal but only sent you £200 in the first place and also held back other payments). I can't attend to it today as the cashier has already left and locked away the relevant book; you will receive it along with Wood's statement of account; but it won't be much. Most of the interest due arose from the fact that the £633 remained with Steinthal from May until November, which produced approx. £16 extra for you.