---
id: MECW42-312
title: "Letter to Jenny Marx, January 3, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 January 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 3 January 1868

Dear Mrs Marx,

I must apologise for leaving your letter[1] unanswered for so long. But the Christmas period is the only time in the whole year when, apart from business, I am made to feel that I stand with one foot in the bourgeoisie, and here in Manchester this entails a lot of eating and drinking and upset stomach, and the obligatory ill humour and waste of time. This is now fairly well over, and I am beginning to breathe freely again.

I am really sorry that I was unable to lay my hands on a larger crate for the moment, but I had to take just what was available in the WAREHOUSE—I shall make up for this soon.

Enclosed the latest from Siebel. Do please return the *letter,* together with an earlier one sent to Moor, as soon as possible, I have to write to him on the 8th, the post goes only twice a month, and it is a great pleasure for the poor devil when he sees that people think of him. He does what he can honestly, despite his illness. The thing from the *Barmer Zeitung* is by him.^671 Moor might let me know what he thinks about the business with the *Kölnische Zeitung;* if he thinks it better that I should write about this to Meissner, I can do so, and, at the same time, send him the cutting from *Barmer.*

The *pater peccavi*[2] from Hoffstetten is very amusing.[3] He naturally suspects Liebknecht everywhere and nobody else.[4] In any case, we have now put paid to the attempt of these gentry to stifle, and at the same time to exploit, the book.[5]

I shall be writing to Wilhelmchen in the next few days. I have heard nothing more from Kugelmann as to how things have gone with the Swabian articles.[6]

Meissner could already put together quite a nice advertisement from the articles that have appeared up to now,[7] which would be quite in place now that the Christmas season is over. In particular, he might include those passages in which the economists are challenged to present their defence.

I hope that Moor has been freed from his carbuncle. But this is all no good, he must do something to get rid of the business once and for all. The 2nd volume[8] can only gain, also with regard to the time needed for completion, if the fight against the carbuncles is waged with full force for a period. How would it be if he were to take arsenic again?

Best greetings to Moor and the whole family, and a hearty Happy New Year from

Yours

F. E.