---
id: MECW42-155
title: "Letter to Ludwig Kugelmann, April 6, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 April 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "Source: Karl Marx, Letters to Dr Kugelmann (Martin Lawrence, London, undated).  Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

Dear Friend

I shall return to London the day after tomorrow. My doctor exiled me to this seaside place,[1] where indeed my health has *greatly improved*. But once again more than two months – February, March and half of April – have been entirely lost and the completion of my book again postponed. It is enough to drive one mad.

I was suffering from carbuncles, not furuncles. This time it was dangerous. Of course you are right in saying that 'dietetic' sins are at the bottom of it. I am too much given to working at night, studying by day and writing by night. That, together with all the worries, private and public, and – so long as I am working hard – the neglect of a regular diet and exercise, etc, is quite enough to disorder the blood.

I received Herr Menke's 100 thalers for the International together with your letter. I have not got the addresses of my French friends in Paris here, but if Herr Menke writes to my friend C Kaub[2] (33 *Rue des trois Couronnes du Temple*) he can introduce him to V Schily[3] (German) and Tolain,[4] Fribourg,[5] etc, members of the Paris Committee.

The news from Germany is not very gratifying. Prussia is being pushed by Russia (and Bonaparte), Austria by the latter (following more reluctantly in self-defence). Will our philistines at last realise that without a revolution which removes the Hapsburgs and Hohenzollerns (it is unnecessary to speak of the lesser dung-beetles) there must finally come another Thirty Years' War and a new partition of Germany!

A movement from the Italian side would help Prussia. But if we consider Austria and Prussia in themselves, it is practically certain that the latter would be at a disadvantage, despite all the *Düppel-Rénommage*.[6] In any case Benedek is a better general than Prince Friedrich Karl. Austria could enforce peace on Prussia single-handed, but not Prussia on Austria. Every Prussian success would be an encouragement to Bonaparte to interfere.

While I write these lines to you, Bismarck may have again drawn in his horns. But even that would only postpone the conflict. I think that such a postponement is probable.

This German trouble is a piece of extraordinary good luck for Bonaparte. His position is undermined on all sides. But war would give him a new lease of life.

Write to me soon, and particularly about German affairs.

Yours
**KM**