---
id: MECW42-081
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 9, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "9 May 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 154; First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 9 May 1865**

**Dear Fred**,

You need not send anything back (except Schily's letter). just keep the things safely. I enclose **one** *Free Press* (the **queer article** on the '**Reconstruction of Italy**' is from the pen of the **High Priest** himself, from Urquhart), also two *Nordsterns* (one of them somewhat out of date). I've got a subscription to the latter, but no longer to the *Social-Demokrat.* The latest *Nordstern* will give you some idea of the situation on the Rhine. Incidentally, the *total number* of the faithful whom B. Becker still commands is barely 1,000.

Before I forget: there were several allusions to your pamphlet in the debate in the Prussian Chamber. *Gneist,* for instance, said the Minister of War would not persuade them, even if his statistics spoke with the tongue of '*Engels'* (Laughter.) (That is how the affair appeared in the *Berliner Reform*.)

As everywhere, the London workers, of course, also include **a knot of asses, fools and rogues, rallying** round a scoundrel. The scoundrel in this case is 'George Potter', **a rat of a man, supported** by a **venal** but witty Irishman by the name of *Connolly,* who is a dangerous **stump-orator**. Although the bourgeoisie hate the said Potter as chief **strike-manager**, they do, nevertheless, support him against our people because they smell **venality** in him, whereas they know that our people are **true men**. This Potter **derives his power** particularly from the fact that he is **presently** the **Manager** of *The Bee-Hive,* the official organ of the **trades unions**, although he uses it against the **Official Council** of these **unions** which is in our hands. Since the paper is based on shares, the idea is now to distribute as many **shares** as possible (**5sh. per share**) amongst our workers. For my part I have undertaken to collect the **money** for **about** 30 **shares**. For this, I'm counting on **you** (**single handed** or with friends) for £5, **I write to** Dronke for £1 and I will pay the rest myself. (Although **my function** with the **Central Council** costs me a *lot* of money, compared with what I can afford.) The money must already be **at hand** *this* week, as the General Meeting of the **shareholders** is next week. If we are only strong enough (and Odger, for instance, has guaranteed 50 **shares**) to elect the **Directors***,* we shall have that rogue Potter (who is only the **Manager**) **under our thumbs**. This matter is of decisive importance for the whole movement.

E. Jones was here, very charming **socially speaking**. But between ourselves, *he is only* trying to use our Association for electoral agitation. Of the 12 cards I sent him, he returned 11, he had not sold a single one, whereas **poor** Schily, for instance, paid for *24* for himself alone. I told him he should just put them back in his pocket again, I would dispose of them later, but I could not appear in front of the English workers and tell them that. **By and by he will find out** that if only for speculative reasons he should not have treated the business so lightly and **rather contemptibly**. *I will* write to him and tell him to hand over the '**Addresses'** to **you**. You can give them to whomsoever you please. They are just dead weight with him. Incidentally, I don't take kindly to the fact that he was here to wangle a job as **Recorder** out of Sir *G.* Grey either.

Today I am to submit an '**Address to President Johnson** Mr *Le Lubez* wants to return to the **Council** as — **Delegate for Deptford**, the same fellow as resigned as **Delegate for France, but his admittance** (**We have to confirm the delegates**) **will not run quite so smoothly as he seems to fancy**. I would be pleased if you could form even just **a branch of 6 men** in Manchester, and could get yourself elected as their **correspondent for London**. For **the corresponding** people are *eo ipso* **members of the Central Council**, and have a seat and a vote on it, **when at London**.

New **branches** have been formed in Lyon, Neufchâteau (*département des Vosges*) and St Denis. The French **branches** (apart from Paris) are not linked with Paris, in view of the existing laws, but directly with London.

I'm hoping to put the finishing touches to my book [*Capital*] by 1 September (despite numerous interruptions). It's going ahead well, although I am still not quite well.

Your
K. M.