---
id: MECW42-346
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, not before November 29, 1864"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: "Jenny von Westphalen"
written: "29 November 1864"
year: 1864
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 565; First published: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Moscow, 1963."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

My dear Mr Engels,

Poor Moor once again has a large and very painful carbuncle. So, he has to lie down, and he finds writing very difficult. I hope that in a few days we shall be over the first eruption. It is dreadful to have that again. You would not credit how splendidly he had the bit between his teeth with the actual copying up of the book. [Capital] There is already a sizeable stack ready for printing. The long hours of sitting and writing until far, far into the night, and the excitement this entails, are undoubtedly responsible for the renewed outbreak of the disease. Karl hopes that the interruption will not be long. He even wants to try and write something today. Enclosed is a letter from Wilhelmchen which he is sending you, likewise one to Weydemeyer which I would be glad if you would see to, since we do not have his address. The price of the cards for the '**International Society**' is Is.1d. However, Moor thinks no one would try to Stop **Gentlemen** giving 5-10s.

A thousand greetings to you, dear Mr Engels, from us all.

Yours
Jenny Marx

Apropos. We have at last had a few lines from our old Uncle Edgar. The Berliners appear to be treating him decently. The **baby** says in his letter that they gave him a 'Christmas present' of coats, trousers, waistcoats, gloves, cigars and a 'hymnbook'. The doctor they consulted declared his illness to be heart-disease. Whenever the doctors do not know what to say, they make do with 'general' heart-disease. I believe his complaint has its scat rather in his lungs and mind.