---
id: MECW42-027
title: "Letter to Sophie von Hatzfeldt, December 22, 1864"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "22 December 1864"
year: 1864
publication: "First published in: *F. Lassalle. Nachgelassene Briefe und Schriften,* Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collecte"
status: raw
---

MARX TO SOPHIE VON HATZFELDT

IN BERLIN

[Draft]

London, 22 December 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill

My dear Countess,

A few days ago, a friend in Hamburg sent me the *Nordstern* containing my statement against Blind,[1] duly emended with misprints.

It was at your request that I made this statement, although its composition did not come easily to me as I did *not* agree with Lassalle's *political tactics.* However, all my scruples were removed by Blind's shameless outburst against the deceased in the *St Louis 'Westliche Post'.*[2] I had not the slightest idea which papers you would send the statement to. The *Nordstern* was the furthest from my mind. Mr Bruhn has now seized upon this opportunity to make an 'indecent gesture' in my direction, by hinting to his readers in the commentaries that I had sought access to his emporium through the back door and had been granted it as an act of extreme graciousness only because a third party had intervened especially on my behalf.[3] I have no doubt that his accomplice in America will make use of this. Is it Mr Bruhn's desire that I should be forced into exposing him publicly for the conceited nonentity that he is?

If Bruhn, Bernhard Becker and *tutti quanti* set out to oppose me and my efforts in any manner whatsoever that I consider harmful to the workers' movement itself, a storm will break about these gentlemen's heads that will take their breath away. Reasons of long-standing personal friendship and party interest, which held me back vis-à-vis Lassalle, can no longer have the slightest force in respect of these *dii minorum gentium*[4] This I am stating once and for all, so that I cannot later be charged with ambiguity or inconsiderateness.

*In no circumstances,* do I wish the *Eighteenth Brumaire* to be published, and, if steps have already been taken to this end, they are to be checked forthwith.[5]

I scarcely dare express any good wishes for the New Year, knowing as I do that the old year has left you, my dear Countess, only with memories.

Yours very respectfully

K. M.