---
id: MECW42-241
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, August 15, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "15 August 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 15 August 1867

Dear Moor,

End. 3 £5-notes I/V 65551.,
, «.<.• CFLII<A Manchester " " " 44954J 2 9 January 1866

and the tax-slip returned. In *these* circumstances, it is *essential* that my return be kept a secret from Borkheim,[1] so that I do not need to pay him until as late as possible in *September,* otherwise I shall be completely stuck, since you will understand that I too have a mass of payments to make here, especially in the new half-year. Furthermore, consequent upon the fall in the price of yarns, we are having to enter the stock in the accounts at approx. £2,500 less than by the prices which applied at the time of my departure. Which is not very pleasant either!

When do you wish to have some of the sheets returned? Schorlemmer asked me to pass them on to him a few at a time, as I finished with them, but that naturally depends on you. I have now read the thing through to the end (cursorily) and definitely think that the second volume is also *indispensable,* and the sooner you finish it, the better.[2] I am now looking through the whole thing again, i.e., the more theoretical aspects. The fellows will be astonished to see with what consummate ease the most difficult points, such as Ricardo's theory of profit, are dealt the *coup de grâce* here in this way.

Kindest regards to your wife.

Your

F. E.

Lupus was born in Tarnau[3] on 21 June 1809, died 9 May 1864.[4]