---
id: MECW42-345
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 29, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 March 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 29 March 1868

Dear Moor,

I am afraid I shall not finish the article for the *Fortnightly*[1] by Tuesday. The damned Schiller Institute business[2] kept me breathless all the week, until I finally got things cleared up yesterday. If I had failed—and several stupidities on the part of my main adjutant put everything doubtful again—I would have been terribly discredited, made ludicrous for the whole of Manchester; TO BE DONE' IN BUSINESS, TO GET YOURSELF SOLD' is naturally here the worst thing that can happen to you. Now it is a great triumph and gives me the opportunity I wanted to withdraw with honour from official participation in the affair; anyway now enough people will be pushing themselves forward for it. I am doubly annoyed because this business has made it impossible for me to complete the article; but for this I would have had to rush it, and in this case the quality is very important.

Schorlemmer has made a very fine discovery: *the law of the boiling points* of the hydrocarbons of the series CnH2n+2, i.e. for three of the four isomeric series; of the 4th, too few have yet been described.[3]

I shall be arriving at your place on Wednesday evening at 9, possibly earlier.[4]

Where on earth can the enclosed article come from? And a letter of Bismarck's to cheer you up.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

I can find nothing about *Wiffa.* But in *higid, hiwisc, hida* you are confusing 2 if not 3 different words.[5]

Anglo-Saxon *hiwisce,* Old Saxon and Old High German *hiwiski,* Old Frisian *hiskthe,* Old Nordic *hyski,* New North Frisian *hiske* = *familia.*

*Higid* can be the participle of the Anglo-Saxon *hegjan,* this verb means TO FENCE IN.

Whether *hide,* which is still encountered locally today as a measure of land, is drawn from this, or is connected with *hide cutis,* Anglo-Saxon *hyde,* I cannot determine without an Anglo-Saxon dictionary.