---
id: MECW42-119
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, end of 1865-beginning of 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "December 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "Presumably an extract appended to one of Marx's letters (MECW) First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 31, Moscow 1963 Published in English for the first time in Mar"
status: raw
---

TO ENGELS IN MANCHESTER

[London, end of 1865-beginning of 1866]

*Appendix*

While I was last staying in Manchester[1] you once asked me to explain differential calculus. The thing will be quite clear to you from the following example. The whole of differential calculus arose originally from the task of drawing *tangents* through any point on any curve. So, that is the example I am going to use for you.

Assume that the line *nAo* is any curve whose nature (whether it's a parabola, ellipse, etc.) is *unknown* to us and on which a tangent is to be drawn at point *m.*

*Ax* is the axis. We drop the perpendicular *mP* (the ordinate) onto the abscissa *Ax.* Now assume that point n is the infinitely *closest* point on the curve beside to. If I drop a perpendicular *np* onto the axis, *p* must be the infinitely closest point to *P* and *np* the infinitely closest parallel line to *mP.* Now drop an infinitely small perpendicular *mR* onto *np.* If you now take the abscissa *AP...X* and the ordinate *mP...y,* then *np* = *mP* (or *Rp),* increased by an infinitely small increment *[nR],* or *[nR]* = *dy* (differential of *y)* and *mR (=Pp)=dx.* Since the part of the tangent *mn* is infinitely small, it coincides with the corresponding part of the curve itself. I can therefore regard *mnR* as a Δ(triangle), and the *ΔmnR* and *mTP* are similar triangles. Therefore: *dy (=nR):dx(=mR)* = *y(mP):PT* (which is the subtangent of the tangent *Tn).* Thus, the subtangent *PT=y* [math]\displaystyle{ \frac{dy}{dx} }[/math]. We now have a *general differential equation* for drawing the tangent at any points on *any* curves. If I am now to operate with this equation and to determine through it the length of the subtangent *PT* (once I have found this, I merely need to connect the points *T* and m by a straight line in order to have the tangent), so I need to know the *specific character* of the curve. According to its character (parabola, ellipse, cissoid, etc.), it will have a *distinct form of general equation* for its ordinate and abscissa at any point, which one can find in algebraic geometry. Thus, if the curve *mAo,* e.g., is a parabola, I know that *y²* (*y*=the ordinate at any given point) = *ax,* where *a* is the parameter of the parabola and *x* is the abscissa corresponding to the ordinate *y.*

If I put this value for *y* into the equation *PT=*[math]\displaystyle{ \frac{y \cdot dx}{dy} }[/math], I must then work out *dy,* i.e. to find the differential of *y* (which represents an infinitely small increment of *y).* If *y²=ax,* I know from the differential calculus that from *d(y²)=d(ax)* (I have to differentiate both sides of the equation, of course), it follows that *2y dy=adx* (*d* always means differential). Thus *dx* = [math]\displaystyle{ \frac{2y \, dy}{a} }[/math]. If I put this value of *dx* into the formula *PT=*[math]\displaystyle{ \frac{y \cdot dx}{dy} }[/math], I get *PT=* [math]\displaystyle{ \frac{2y^2 \, dy}{a \, dy} }[/math] = [math]\displaystyle{ \frac{2y^2}{a} }[/math] = [math]\displaystyle{ \frac{2ax}{a} }[/math] (since *y²=ax*) = *2x.* Or the subtangent of any point *m* on the parabola=twice the abscissa of the same point. The differential values are cancelled in the operation.