---
id: MECW42-061
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 6, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 March 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 6 March 1865

Dear Moor,

Yours of the day before yesterday received, as was the *Social-Demokrat* today containing that droll article excommunicating us.[1] It really makes one laugh.

I have been at home with 'flu most of today, but I shall go and see the lawyer about the Lupus affair[2] as soon as possible. Everything will be straight as soon as the fellow completes; Borchardt has been paid his £100 (i.e. less the money he has already had), and the Schiller Institute also its £100, too; furthermore, I gave the lawyer approx. £150 to cover tax and am only waiting for his account now before remitting the rest to you directly. I shall put together a provisional balance sheet for you in a day or two so that you can see how things stand.

Things from Siebel and a certain Lange enclosed. *Qu'en penses-tu?*[3] Send the stuff back, as well as the letter from *Meissner,* which I must have for my correspondence with him. I am sending him the cuttings for him to see that we have also got people to push things along.

The *Kölnische Zeitung* has also printed our statement,[4] but only up to the words that the *Social-Demokrat's* tactics preclude our further participation in it.

Bruhn returned enclosed. How THE HELL CAME YOU TO OWE THAT FELLOW ANY BRASS?[5] However much it is, I shall send it to you at once.

2 COPIES of the pamphlet[6] despatched herewith. They are the last ones. But I have ordered some more. There is an announcement about the pamphlet in the *Kölner Zeitung.*

What kind of 'PAPERS from the Manchester *press* relating to the COTTON-CRISIS' are you talking about? Surely you mean from the RELIEF COMMITTEE?[7] I have not seen Maclure for some time; as soon as I encounter him, I shall have a word with him about it.

Gumpert does not think much of Kugelmann's phosphate of lime. At all events, it is not a specific remedy. He says you ought to take arsenic. Returned enclosed.

I must now go to the Schiller Institute to chair the *Comité.* By the by, one of the fellows there, a chemist,[8] has recently explained Tyndall's experiment with sunlight[9] to me. It is really capital.

Your

F. E.