---
id: MECW42-167
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, June 9, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "9 June 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 June 1866

DEAR FRED,

Many thanks for the £10.

Whatever the pressure from events, my work[2] has been progressing poorly owing to purely physical factors ever since my return from Margate.[3] I have been so low over the last few weeks that I have not been able even to attend the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION any more. I had Gumpert's prescription (for my liver) made up for me yesterday, as Allen's stuff was of no use at all to me. Furthermore, I have had a tooth pulled, to put an end to the toothache, and probably a second one will have to go, too.

If your wine-cellar permits (that is, if you are not thereby obliged to buy in more), I should appreciate it if you would send me some, as I am now forbidden beer altogether.

The verses await your 'commentary'. They are nothing in my hands.

This evening I am compelled to go to the meeting of the 'DIRECTORS AND FRIENDS' of *The Commonwealth.*[4] The thing is on its last legs. Apart from the acute financial difficulties, there are internal political ones as well. Since that jackass of a Bradford MANUFACTURER, Mr Kell (who has given £50, his brother ditto, and hints of more to come), has Miall entirely under his thumb, Dr Bridges, Professor Beesly, Harrison (the COMTEISTS) have threatened not merely to resign but also to make a public statement about their resignation.

I am tired of the business and shall propose to the people this evening that they should *sell* their bankrupt institution to Kell *et* Co. and put an end to the farce of A BRADFORD MANUFACTURER directing a London 'workers' organ'. If they do not agree, I shall, at all events, announce my withdrawal. The paper cannot survive for much longer on its own resources, is therefore dependent on advances of bourgeois money, and thereby loses its own character. I have shown great patience in this matter, because I always hoped that the workers themselves would make sufficient efforts to continue the undertaking on their own; and, for another thing, I did not want to be a wet blanket.

Mr Gottfried Kinkel has been appointed to a chair in Zurich. Since the sounds of war started up, the 'Saxon' workers have been flocking to join the 'INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION'.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

COMPLIMENTS TO MRS LIZZY.[5]

Apropos. Lafargue tells me that the whole new French school of microscopical physiologists, with Robin at their head, is pronouncing against Pasteur, Huxley, etc., and in favour of *generatio aequivoca.*[6] He is going to inform me of some new writings on the subject.