---
id: MECW42-135
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, February 22, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 February 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 This letter was published in English for the first time in Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, *Selected Letters. "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 22 February 1866

Dear Moor,

Thanks for 'Klein Zaches',[1] etc., which I take as evidence that you have received the £10.

I have just come from Gumpert, whom I did not see until this evening on account of my influenza and having missed him several times. He considers that you *should start the arsenic at once.* Whatever happens it can do you no harm, but only good. He dismisses Allen's comment that it does not agree with you as rubbish. He also considers treatment with poultices to be nonsense; it only encourages *inflammation of the skin,* which is precisely what needs to be suppressed, while it does not encourage suppuration. Ice-packs would be much better, but as long as you are in Allen's hands, these could only be applied if he prescribed them, of course. But above all, sea air, to restore your strength. A spot on the south coast would be preferable, it is true, as in this season the weather there is better than up here, but if you would rather be near Gumpert, there are places enough on the coast here within an hour's ride from Manchester. You can see I have got Gumpert to change his attitude, so that he is now pressing you to take arsenic at once, even though Allen is still treating you externally, whereas before, for reasons of etiquette, he would not hear of it. But do me a favour now and take the arsenic, and come up here just as soon as your condition permits, so that you do at last get better. With this constant procrastination you are just ruining yourself; no one can withstand such a chronic succession of carbuncles for long, apart from the fact that eventually you may get one that becomes so acute as to be the end of you. And where will your book[2] and your family be then?

You know that I am prepared to do what is in my power, and, in this extreme case, more even than I ought to risk in other circumstances. But you must be sensible, too, and do me and your family the one favour of *getting yourself cured.* What would become of the whole movement if anything were to happen to you, and the way you are proceeding, that will be the *inevitable* outcome. I really shall not have any peace day or night until I have got you over this business, and every day that passes without my hearing anything from you, I worry and imagine you are worse again.

*Nota bene.* You should never again let things come to such a pass that a carbuncle which actually ought to be lanced, is not lanced. That is extremely dangerous.

Kindest regards to the ladies.

Your

F. E.