---
id: MECW42-021
title: "Letter to Ludwig Kugelmann, November 29, 1864"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "29 November 1864"
year: 1864
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p 45;. First published: in *Die Neue Zeit*, Stuttgart, 1901-1902."
status: raw
---

*To Ludwig Kugelmann in Hanover*

Dear Friend,

Today you will receive from me by post 6 copies of the '**Address of the Workingmen's International Association',** of which I am the author. Please be so good as to convey a copy with my kindest regards to Madame Markheim (Fulda). Give one to Mr Miquel as well.

The Association — or rather its Committee — is important because the leaders of the London **trade unions** belong to it, the same people who organised that enormous reception for Garibaldi and thwarted Palmerston's plan for a war with the United States by means of the monster meeting in St James's Hall. The leaders of the Parisian workers are also in contact with it.

In the last few years I have been much afflicted with illness (e.g., in the last 14 months by a recurrence of carbuncles). My private circumstances have improved in consequence of a legacy from the death of my mother.

I think that my book on capital (60 sheets) will at last be ready for the press next year.

You will doubtless understand the reasons for not allowing myself to become involved in Lassalle's movement in his lifetime, without my spelling them out in detail. However, that cannot deter me — the more so since persons close to him are urging me to do so — from taking up his defence, now that he is dead, against such despicable curs as the clamorous K. Blind.

I am afraid that in mid-spring or early summer of next year there will be war between Italy, Austria and France. This will be very damaging for the movement in France and England, which is growing significantly.

I hope to hear from you soon.

Yours very respectfully
K. Marx