---
id: MECW42-311
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 3, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "3 January 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "Part of this letter was published in English for the first time in Karl Marx & Frederick Engels, *Letters on 'Capital',* New Park Publications, London, 1983 First published abridged in *Der Briefwechs"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 January 1868

DEAR FRED,

Happy New Year! I have only been 'sitting up' again for 3 days after lying all bent for so long. It was a nasty attack. You can judge this by the fact that for 3 weeks—no smoking! My head is still shaky. In a few days I hope to be back in action.

I am absolutely opposed to arsenic. Enclosed the *Beobachter*)[1] (Lessner filched it for me from the *Workers' Society*[2].

I have had no more letters from Siebel except the enclosed one to me.

Meissner can always have a try with the *Barmer*.[3] It can do no harm. When you send the cuttings to Meissner, you must refer to them only as something which has come to hand, without explaining to him 'our' activity.[4] Also draw his attention to the latest things in the *Zukunft*.[5]

I would like to know from Schorlemmer what is the latest and best book (German) on agricultural chemistry. Furthermore, what is the present state of the argument between the mineral-fertiliser people and the nitrogen-fertiliser people? (Since I last looked into the subject, all sorts of new things have appeared in Germany.) Does he know anything about the most recent Germans who have written *against* Liebig's soil-exhaustion theory? Does he know about the alluvion theory of the Munich agronomist Fraas (Professor at Munich University)?[6] For the chapter on ground rent[7] I shall have to be aware of the latest state of the question, at least to some extent. Since Schorlemmer is an expert on this subject he must be able to give information.

Enclosed 2 Urquharts[8] and 1 *Courrier* (because of Cluseret's article).

The compliments of the season to Mrs Burns, Moore, and Schorlemmer.

Your

Moor

[From Eleanor Marx, in English]

You bad boy, why haven't you answered my letters?—I suppose you and the hedgehog have been on the spree again.

*Alberich,*[9]

the grim dwarf

Happy New Year.