---
id: MECW42-333
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 6, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 March 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 March 1868

DEAR FRED,

BEST THANKS FOR THE.£10. The copies of *Social-Demokrat* promised by Meissner have not arrived. This shows that he is not at all precise. Thus for instance the copies for Paris have not been dispatched either. There the worthy Moses[2] has prevaricated for so long[3] that the *Courrier français* has now finally announced that as the result of the many *amendes,[4] * etc., it will soon completely quit the stage.

I have not seen Eichhoff's lucubrations and anyway not the *Zukunft* for a very long time.[5] Since Eichhoff's brother[6] is a bookseller and specialises in political economy (he is the publisher of several opera of Dr Dühring), this is reason enough for Eichhoff to deliver lectures on the same subject.

My head is in a sorry state. But that should 'disappear' BY AND BY, as soon as the last traces of carbuncledom have gone.

I wrote to Holland[7] again yesterday since the matter is becoming *brûlante.*[8] Old Lafargue[9] has dealt with the necessary marriage BANNS, etc., in Bordeaux, and has sent all the papers here. He now expects that the wedding will take place here at the beginning of next month, and that the pair will go to Paris, to which he will later move. We, however, have not yet risked taking the necessary steps here for the BANNS, since my wife has not yet been able to acquire even the most essential things for Laura. For worthy Freiligrath all this went very smoothly, but then he is 'noble'.

As soon as this affair is SETTLED, it will be a great relief for the entire household, since Lafargue is as good as living with us, which perceptibly increases EXPENSES.

As far as the 'reviews' are concerned, I think that after you have supplied Liebknecht[10] you should abandon the German ones and only pursue the English. First, the echo of an English review in Germany is more powerful than vice versa, and secondly this is, after all, the only country where finally money can be made from the business.

Mr Macleod has nevertheless achieved a 2nd edition of his lousy and pedantic-scholastic book on BANKS.[11] He is a very stilted jackass who expresses every banal tautology 1. in algebraic form, and 2. constructs it geometrically. I have already given him a passing kick in the pamphlet published by Duncker.[12] His 'great' discovery is: credit *is* capital.

*Salut*

Your

K. M.