---
id: MECW42-164
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 17, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "17 May 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "Part of this letter was published in English for the first time in Karl Marx, *On the First International.* Arranged and edited, with an introduction and new translations by Saul K. Padover, New York,"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 17 May 1866

DEAR FRED, How are the *articles on Poland*[1] progressing? The paper[2] may or may not hold out, you must give as much as you can. The Poles here are waiting for the next article and BOTHER ME with enquiries. The articles have created a stir in other respects, too. Having earlier praised them, *Foxikins* launched a DIATRIBE the day before yesterday in the Central Council against the passage in which you ascribe the partitioning to the corruption of the Polish aristocracy. Amongst other things, he singled out the Germans for attack, for having ruined the Poles in particular through the Saxon dynasty, etc. I replied to him in brief.[3]

It is true that for all their big talk the Prussians are inclined to draw in their horns, and Bismarck is meeting strong opposition from Burp,[4] too. But a retreat is scarcely possible in Italy, and that may have repercussions on Prussia again. What Izzy[5] is missing by being so dead! Bismarck would have had him playing a part now. Bismarck is surely cursing us (and thinking us Austrian agents) for spoiling his easy game with the workers.

From the beginning of this week my work[6] has at last been advancing again. If you can send me some *vino,* please do so, as the sudden abstinence may do harm.

Mr Mazzini gave himself no rest until he had founded an 'INTERNATIONAL REPUBLICAN COMMITTEE' in opposition to us. On it are jackass Holtorp, Langiewicz, Ledru, Kinkel, Blind, I believe also—Bolleter! Our Association is gaining ground daily. Only in Germany nothing can be done, on account of jackass Liebknecht (GOOD FELLOW AS HE IS!).

The present crisis appears to me to be merely a premature, specifically financial crisis. It could only become important if the business in the UNITED STATES goes rotten, and there would scarcely be time for that now. What effect is it having on you COTTONLORDS? And what effect has the fall in cotton prices had?

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.