---
id: MECW42-208
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, January 29, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 January 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 29 January 1867

Dear Moor,

I have been so overrun by philistines this morning that I did not manage to despatch the second half of the note by first post, but am doing so herewith.

I expect Meissner will accept your opinion. At all events it is obvious that after the first volume[1] you must have a 6 week rest,

[2][3]

and also see how you can put money in your purse on the Continent. I think it will be all right if you take him the rest of the manuscript yourself.

The position regarding
WORKINGMEN AND MANUFACTURERS is
as follows: India, China, Levant, etc., grossly oversupplied, in consequence of which CALICOS have been almost unsaleable for the last 6 months. In some districts feeble attempts by the MANUFACTURERS to organise SHORT TIME ensued. Being only sporadic, all of these collapsed. Meanwhile, the manufacturers go and send *consignments* of their goods, unsaleable here, to India and China, etc., thereby aggravating the GLUT. They then discover that this does not agree with them either, and they finally propose the HANDS should take a 5% REDUCTION OF WAGES. Whereupon counterproposal from the HANDS to work just 4 days a week. *Refus*[4] of the MASTERS—AGITATION. In the last fortnight, finally, a situation has gradually been reached, and most recently become general, where SHORT TIME at 4 days a week has been introduced everywhere in the weaving mills and in the spinning mills that spin for them, in some cases *with* and in some cases *without* the 5% reduction in wages. The workers therefore were right in theory and were proved right in practice, too.[5]

The scoundrel Bismarck has splendidly gulled the scoundrel Bonaparte over the Peace of Prague, exactly as Bonaparte gulled the Austrians at Villafranca about the expelled Italian princes *qui rentreront dans leurs états*[6] —but without recourse to foreign troops.[7] Bismarck is thus saying: the South German states *auront une existence internationale indépendante*[8] but only for so long as they *themselves wish;* from the moment that they *wish* to join with us, they shall be entirely free to do so, otherwise after all they *would be not indépendants!*[9] POOR Bonaparte has never been a member of a student fraternity at a German university, nor has he ever practised the art of interpretation at one of their beer-conventions, and is consequently no match for the Hon. Bismarck. In Hanover they are most frightfully vexed at the Prussians,[10] and not just the city itself but even more so amongst the peasantry — they are flocking to the queen[11] and putting all their assets at her disposal.

There is much ludicrous sentimentality therein, mixed with hatred for the military and the police; the very same people, e. g., are themselves saying that the administration is much improved, etc., but the Prussians' talent for inspiring hatred for themselves has once again proved itself here, too. I have this from 2 people who were there a short while ago and are themselves annexationists and Hanoverians.

If I can manage it, I'll come down and see you for a few days at the end of this week or next, i. e., from Friday to Sunday evening. Providing it does not freeze again. Kindest regards to the LADIES.

Your

F. E.