---
id: MECW42-305
title: "Letter to Ludwig Kugelmann, December 12, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 December 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN IN HANOVER

Manchester, 12 December 1867

Dear Kugelmann,

Your zeal truly deserves my gratitude, but it appears greatly to overestimate my free time. I received your letter of 30 November on 2 December, held counsel with Marx, as there were several things in it to be considered, and would already have sent you various articles, if on Sunday I had not been visited by a toothache-influenza-sore throat with inevitable fever, which prostrated me on the sofa. Fortunately, that kind of thing takes an acute course with me, and so I am fit for work again today and will be setting my nose to the grindstone at once. But you must not imagine that one can just toss off a dozen reviews of one and the same book[1] and not merely say something different in each one but also so compose them that one cannot tell they are all by one author. One often has to pause for thought.[2]

I would advise against writing directly to Miquel. There are some things which can be achieved *verbally* with such people and which are scarcely to be risked in writing. He will surely be coming over to Hanover sometime.

The *United States of Europe*[3] was stillborn. And with Vogt's brother[4] and minion as editor—pshaw!

The Englishman who called on Brandes was our friend Moore from here, who spent 7 weeks in Eisenach for German-learning purposes; I had no idea he would be passing by, or I should have written him a few lines to give to you. He might perhaps have called on you anyway, except that he had curiously got it fixed in his head that you lived in Hamburg. He will probably undertake the English translation of Marx' book.[5]

Concerning Liebknecht's South German outburst, I have written to him that nothing is achieved by it.[6] He would have done better not to publish his speeches,[7] *in extenso*[8] their effect is lost, the nonsense in them obtrudes too much. I also wrote to him about his curious theory on the postponement of the social question.[9] You will recall, incidentally, that I was already telling you last autumn that he had become too much of an Austrian owing to his hatred of the Prussians.

This brief epistle just to keep you informed. The articles will follow in a few days time, and you can then at all events tell the Lieutenant-Colonel[10] that there will be a few more, and there will then be something for him to do.

In friendship

Yours

F. E.