---
id: MECW42-256
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, September 11, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 September 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Part of this letter was published in English "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 September 1867

Dear Moor,

The congress really does appear to have been swept away in the French tide this time, the number of Proudhonist resolutions is really far too large.[1] It is good that it will be coming to Belgium next time, by then it will perhaps be possible to do something in North Germany as well, and then, with the help of the English, to dam up the flood. Meanwhile, whatever they resolve there is more or less just wasted breath as long as the CENTRAL COUNCIL remains in London. Once again *notre cher*[2] Philipp Becker appears to have committed some of his unpremeditated blunders, for which one must forgive the old agitator when he has no one to guide him.[3]

That Eccarius wrote the reports in *The Times* must be kept secret.[4] In view of the manner in which the editors have trimmed his story, it could do him enormous harm. The next time that he reports to the paper, he will have to consider more carefully to what extent his humour can be exploited by the bourgeois editors to cast RIDICULE on the whole business and not just on the few

*crapauds.*[5]

Since you are in contact with Vermorel, can you not moderate the fellow's asininities with regard to Germany? It is really too much if the jackass is demanding that *Bonaparte* should become *liberal,* bourgeois liberal, and then start a war to liberate Germany from the tyranny of Bismarck![6] These *crapauds,* who will have to handle Germany with great delicacy even *if* they do make a revolution, believe that but a slight turn toward liberalism would enable them to revert to their old roles. I regard it as most important, particularly in the event of a revolution, that these gentlemen should become accustomed to treating us *d'égal à égal*[7]

According to them, Bismarckism in Germany is an inherent characteristic of Germany, which they must destroy by intervening, but their own Bonapartism is a mere accident and could be terminated just by a change of ministers and transformed into its opposite.

The great Schweitzer has been happily elected with the assistance of the pietists[8] of Elberfeld and Barmen, and will now have the opportunity to bowdlerise various points from your book[9] in the 'Reichstag'. You may wager your life that he will do so. However, it can only do good and will afford us much entertainment; once the book is out, only good can come of such things.

Apropos of Barmen, I am reminded of Siebel. The poor devil is dreadfully sick again and is once more having to leave Barmen, though I do not know whereto; it is possible he will not live out the winter. He must be very bad, so I cannot count on him raising any cry for your book in the newspapers. He has written me a very DESPONDING letter.

The TRADES OUTRAGE COMMISSION'S[10] conclusions here are entirely farcical and are no different from those reached 7 years ago. If they do not produce anything better, they might as well pack their bags. Just imagine seeing BRICKMAKING AND BRICKLAYING treated as the chief industries of Manchester!

The defects which have become apparent in the tests carried out on the Chassepot rifle here are the very ones which had already been discovered in Berlin and which Bölzig told me of in Hanover. At that time, I thought that they had *deliberately* allowed faulty specimens to fall into the hands of the Prussians, but now it rather looks as though there is something in it, in which case the rifle is not half as good as the Prussians' needle-gun.

Meissner's people in Leipzig appear to be taking an inordinately long time to send the book out. Still no notices anywhere. Do you think I should attack the thing from the bourgeois point of view, to get things under way? Meissner or Siebel would surely get that accepted by a paper.[11] As for it being prohibited,[12] I don't believe it myself, but one can never swear that the zeal of some government official will not get the better of him, and once a case has been brought, you could rely on your friend Lippe.

Kindest regards to your wife and the girls, who I presume are back now.[13]

The *Diplomatic Reviews* received with thanks.

Your

F. E.