---
id: MECW42-326
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 4, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "4 February 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 4 February 1868

DEAR FRED,

Many thanks for the 'medicine BOTTLES'. I still have two not quite withered buds under my left arm and on my left thigh. However, they do not bother me when walking. I feel GENERALLY better as well.

I quite agree with you that you should not go into the money theory for the time being, but only indicate that the matter has been treated in a new way.[1]

Enclosures from Vienna from Fox (please send them back to me). You see what effect your essay in the *Börsenzeitung*[2] is having.[3] It is perhaps best to leave Vienna to its own devices. It is enough that attention has been drawn there to my book.[4] The whole business is very immature. When you consider how agriculture still predominates in the Empire *en gros,* then it is comical to watch these somersaults. What prevails in Vienna is finance, and not large industry. However, as a ferment the hubbub cannot hurt.

Kugelmann has sent me *Dühring's Verkleinerer Carey's.* I was right that he only noticed me in order to annoy the others.[5] What is very conspicuous is the very coarse way in which this affected Berliner handles Mill, Roscher, etc., while he treats me with timid care. According to him, apart from Carey, List is the greatest genius of the 19th century. In another pamphlet *Kapital und Arbeit* which I saw today at the Museum,[6] he **abuses** Lassalle. I shall send you his book to look at one of these days.

Perhaps there will be no war this year. The fellows are all anxious about domestic conditions. However, the Russians will not neglect to provide causes of friction. They will lie fallow if they do not manage to bring Germany and France to blows.

Coppel was here on Sunday and will come again on Wednesday. He is here to put the financial affairs of the King of Hanover[7] in order. He is a merry fellow. Kugelmann has forced this cousin of the Rothschilds to study my book.

There is little new for me in Schorlemmer's letter^g. But still MY THANKS.

*Salut.* Y o u r

Moro

I can only send the newspaper cuttings tomorrow because the BOXES for BOOK-POST were closed.