---
id: MECW42-322
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 25, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "25 January 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 January 1868

DEAR FRED,

I went out again yesterday for the first time, and the scar will be healed in 1-2 days. Naturally I am still weak after this bad attack.

I hope that your indisposition is only the momentary outcome of the week on the spree. In any case, you must not neglect your health for my sake or for ANY BODY OR THING ELSE.

In last week's *Saturday Review* there is a note about my book.[2] I have not seen it yet, and also do not know who wrote it. Borkheim has communicated the FACT to me.

As regards *Liebknecht,* one *should no longer butter him up.* This young man very much likes to play the 'protector', as he already showed once earlier when he was in London. This is also shown by his latest letter to you.[3] He feels very important, and *au cas de besoin nous ferons notre petit bonhomme de chemin sans lui et malgré lui.*[4] What magnanimity that he has reprinted the preface, which nearly all the papers printed months ago![5] And in addition he has actually had 2 COPIES of my book sent to Contzen and the editor of the *Volks-Zeitung!* To SHOW HIM THE COLD SHOULDER is best. Apart from this, I do not believe that he has yet read 15 pages of the book. He had not read *Herr Vogt* a whole year after it had appeared, and that was not very heavy reading. His motto is: teach but not learn.

As far as the 'Lassalleans' are concerned, I only deal with the TRADE UNIONS, COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES, etc. in Volume II.[6] I think therefore that I shall *at present* only take the initiative with regard to 'Lassalle' if a direct occasion should offer itself.

Regarding the way to deal with the Viennese, I shall write to you shortly, when my head is ALL RIGHT again.

Please return the enclosed letters from Kugelmann and Kertbény. I have not yet replied. Coppel the Great hasn't turned up yet.

It would be beneficial in my present state if you could let me have a shipment of your more FULLFLAVOURED claret (also SOME HOCK or Moselle).

Card, the Pole, has written from Geneva and offered himself as French translator, he seems to have a book-seller in Geneva. Through my wife I have had this letter sent to Schily, so that he can use it in Paris to further the affair.[7] Card is absolutely unsuitable, except to give Moses[8] a fright.

For 2-3 weeks I shall do absolutely no work (i.e. *writing),* at the most read; and as soon as the wound is completely healed (in the meantime, I THINK ONLY FOR ONE OR TWO DAYS, the bad part rubs and itches when I walk) then I shall do a lot of walking. It would be dreadful if a 3rd monster were to erupt.

And now, *salut,* MY DEAR BOY.

Your

K. Marx