---
id: MECW42-247
title: "Letter to Auguste Vermorel, August 27, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "27 August 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Translated from the French Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO AUGUSTE VERMOREL[1]

IN PARIS

*London,* 27 August 1867

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill

Citizen,

Two things astonish me in your newspaper,[2] for whose character, courage, good will and talent I have respect.

1. You are turning your paper into an echo for *Russian lies* (and Greek, the Greeks having been taken in by the Russians) about the so-called revolution in Crete.[3] May I be permitted to send you an *English extract* on the true state of affairs in Candia.[4]

2. You reproduced the *canards* (of *Russian* origin) concerning the initiative North America is to take against the Turks. You ought to know that the President of the United States does not have the power to declare war. The Senate alone can decide. If President Johnson, *who is a dirty tool of the SLAVEHOLDERS,* although you are so naive as to make him out to be a second Washington, seeks to win a little popularity by entangling foreign-policy affairs and BY SWAGGERING ABROAD, the YANKEES are neither children nor French. The mere fact that he has taken the *initiative* amid all this tentative exploration suffices to nullify any serious effect it may have.

You must excuse my taking the liberty of writing to you thus. We are both pursuing the same aim, the emancipation of the proletariat. This entitles us to be frank with one another.

I would ask you *not to publish* these lines. I am addressing them to you privately and as a friend.

Greetings and fraternity,

Karl Marx

Member of the General Council

of the International Working

Men's Association

I am most astonished at your plaudits for the Peace League.[5] It is no less (I refer to the Peace Congress) than cowardice in action. One must either protest in Berlin and Paris, or else—if one is too cowardly to do that—at least not deceive the public with ambiguous, ineffectual and declamatory pronouncements.