---
id: MECW42-068
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 14, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "14 March 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 14 March 1865

Dear Moor,

The business of the £40 is based solely on a statement of the business I made out in November, in which this £40 figures as 'CASH' to you, but undated. I had the impression myself that I had *not yet* sent you this £40, but as I had no opportunity to check, I could only go by the memorandum. Today I checked my account in the ledger, but I couldn't deduce anything relevant from that either. But if you've not had the £40 and, at the same time, I too have the vague feeling that that is the position, that's good enough, and I've already given the cashier instructions to have the money ready tomorrow.

On the question of the statement in the *Düsseldorfer Zeitung,*[1] I'm in complete agreement. Though on the whole it doesn't matter at all if Mr Schweitzer occasionally takes it into his head to indulge in such barefaced effrontery, I did, nevertheless, find it galling that this vulgar upstart rogue should be allowed to get away with such behaviour towards us. Furthermore, if his smarmy letters aren't published *now,* they won't be any use at all later. It's always nice when someone like that gets the scolding he deserves for once. So, do il straightaway, and please ask Dresemann to send 2 COPIES, so that I can have one.

In haste.

Your

F. E.