---
id: MECW42-264
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, October 9, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "9 October 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 October 1867

DEAR FRED,

Borkheim is expecting a letter from you first that you are willing to be co-guarantor.[2]

*Poor* Lafargue is in the final throes today, putting Borkheim's *preface* into decent French (insofar as that is possible!). The latter has baptised his opus: '**Ma perle* devant le Congrès de Genève*.[3] **

Curious how the itch for literary fame can make a FOOL of an otherwise quite intelligent *garçon*![4]

So, yesterday, Fox was to decapitate Eccarius.[5] The former took more than 1 hour to speak his indictment. He had most maliciously assembled the worst passages and displayed all the arts of an Old Bailey[6] barrister, also continually attacking me. In my riposte I dealt him such telling blows that in his final REPLY he quite lost his composure and self-control. Everyone joined in the discussion. The outcome: my MOTION (or amendment RATHER) 'to proceed to the order of the day' was accepted by an enormous majority. Nevertheless, Eccarius got a regular dressing down in the course of the debate.

You must read the piece 'Le troisième larron' I have marked in the *Courrier*)[7] that you will get at the same time (splendid that the French are already *sans gêne*[8] calling *their* Bonaparte one of the *larrons*[9].[10] As soon as I have the numbers back from Lormier, I shall send the interesting COMMUNICATIONS about the MEXICAN affair.[11]

*Salut*

Your

K. M.

Apropos. Strohn spent the day here yesterday. He fancies you meant to slight him on his last visit to Manchester, with your remark, 'Yes, in Bradford the *commis voyageur*[12] still counts for something.' I tried to drive this nonsense out of his mind.— He says Dronke had procured the British *associé* for the copper company himself. He had probably demanded to be indemnified for it, and no doubt he had based himself on spurious but legally defensible claims when appropriating or laying his hands on a portion of the copper passing through his hands. He did not believe that Dronke had unwarrantedly *frisé*[13] the *code pénal* directly. *Tant mieux*[14]