---
id: MECW42-069
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 18, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "18 March 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London] 18 March 1865

DEAR FRED, There are a lot of things, some of them important, that I want to write to you about. But as there's A VERY GREAT DEAL OF BUSINESS to do in connection with my departure tomorrow,[1] just the following bare facts:

The remaining HALVES of the notes received. You can send the POST OFFICE order to my wife. I've sent off a note from Bender asking for 50 copies, etc., of your pamphlet,[2] etc., to *O. Meissner* direct, as I had to write to him today. It is possible that Meissner's answer may arrive *too late* for the *next Londoner Anzeiger.* Since Bender does at present without doubt know best how to disseminate things of this kind in England, you should send him *a note about the price of the pamphlet* by return if you can (i.e. if you know it yourself). He will then advertise it straightaway in the next number. His address is 8 Little Newport St., Leicester Square.

I did a short, highly condensed little article for Bender, such as I thought would be suitable for his paper,)[3] a kind of prospectus of contents, and sent Juch conversely, contrariwise and notwithstanding, just your pamphlet itself, asking him to do a critique of it in his own way and according to his own point of view.[4] Then I received enclosed note from Juch *(to be kept).* There certainly wasn't the time for a critical review. So, I sent the notice originally intended for Bender (in today's *Hermann*) to Juch[5] (and the enclosed message to Bender instead[6]. At the same time, I wrote to Juch—diplomacy becoming increasingly important—that I couldn't meet his request because I was going away, that he should print copious extracts in a later number; I would discuss his difficulty in finding contributors with him when I returned to London. (I am thinking of placing Eccarius there, instead of with the *Social-Demokrat*) I sent him ditto a copy of my statement against Schweitzer,[7] although the *Hermann* won't be able to print it until next Saturday's edition (copies sent at the same time to *Reform* in Berlin and to the *Düsseldorfer Zeitung*); no amendments in the version for the *Hermann* except a stab at Blind inserted at the beginning.

Bender has written to me ditto:

'Most obliged and grateful for notice you sent; but we now need a review as well.'

I've passed this on to Eccarius. Also enclosed a number of the *Rheinische Zeitung* sent to me by Liebknecht with HIS SPEECH.[8] His wife[9] has written to mine; they are really down on their luck. He still owed the *Social-Demokrat £5,* etc. I can't send him anything at the present moment. *Nordstern* enclosed. You must *keep* this document. You can see these gentlemen are now trying to make out that that wretch Schweitzer completely *falsified* Lassalle.[10] So, my statement against Schweitzer, which also repudiates Lassalle, even though very indirectly, comes at a most opportune moment. It will all come out in the wash by and by.

It appears from the enclosed letter from Bruhn that I was right about Frisch.[11] I've sent him the 6 talers (not 60!), although I'm not convinced by it, at the same time saying that I would 'make further enquiries' regarding the 50, etc.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Apropos. *Klings* called in on his way to America. He had all kinds of interesting things to report to me. A real 'Rhineland' worker.

On *5 March* the *Cologne* branch of the *General Workers' Association* decided to issue a protest (along the lines of our statement)[12] against the *Social-Demokrat,* and *against B. Becker* as well, who is a kind of Biscamp Secundus. They have *STOPPED THE MONEY SUPPLIES.* And this refusal to pay taxes is catching.