---
id: MECW42-036
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 1, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "1 February 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 72; First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 1 February 1865**

Dear **Frederick**,

Enclosed letter from Strohn to be returned; write to me and let me know your thoughts about the publishing business at the same time.

This 'Siebold' is the Siebold of champagne fame, **no doubt about that**. I really am rather afraid that he did not merely find my reception of his bubbly enthusiasm very dry, but **that he caught some queer words at Gumpert's door, as I told you at the time**. At all events, it is nice of the fellow and quite typical of wine-salesman politics to go straight from us to Karl Blind and run as his **messenger** to Hamburg. Has Blind perhaps also placed an order for 'sparkling wines' and granted his most gracious protection to scum-scoundrelism as well? I hope for the sake of bubbly's good reputation that Siebold is no such **venal** scum, although there was no mistaking that while one of his eyes was sparkling with enthusiasm, the other **had an eye to business**. Regarding Freiligrath, I **feel sure** that he is much **too cautious** to agree *publicly* in any way to collaborate *(in partibus* [to all appearances], it goes without saying) with Blind. **However, I shall try to ascertain the fact**. At all events, it is very good that Strohn has so gratifyingly baulked Ruge and Blind. I sent off a few sarcastic marginalia to him earlier today, intended specifically for Meissner, concerning the *nobile par* of antagonistic brothers.

You must excuse the scraps of English in my epistle as there was a **sitting of the Council** yesterday which lasted until **One o'clock**. ('Liquor' and 'smoke' are *banned* from these '**sittings'.**) The first thing was the answering epistle from Lincoln, which you may find in tomorrow's *Times* and certainly in *The Daily News* and *The Star.* In the reply to the **London Emancipation Society** (which counts among its members such illustrious figures as Sir Charles Lyell and the 'Voice of World History', alias K.B.), published in yesterday's *Evening Star,* the old man drily dismisses the fellows with two formal clichés, exactly as he had done in his earlier answer to the *Manchester* branch of the **Emancipation Society**; whereas his letter to us is in fact everything we could have asked for, and, in particular, the naive assurance that the *United States* could not involve itself directly in '**propagandism'.** At any rate, it is the only answer so far **on the part of the Old Man** that is more than a strictly formal one.

*Secondly,* a delegate was there from the Poles (*aristocrats*), who have links with the '**Literary Society',** through whom these gentlemen conveyed their solemn assurance, with an eye to the forthcoming **meeting** on Poland, that they are *democrats* and that every Pole is *now* a democrat, since the aristocracy has dwindled away to such a degree that they would be *mad* not to recognise the *impossibility* of restoring Poland without a peasant rising. **Whether** or not these fellows believe what they say, at all events, the last lesson they had does not seem to have been entirely wasted on them.

*Thirdly,* there were statements from various **trades unions** about their joining. Ditto from an association in *Brussels* which is promising to organise branches throughout Belgium.

I then handed over an issue of the *Daily St. Louis Press* which had arrived just yesterday containing leader about our '**Address to the Workingmen'** and an excerpt from it which had obviously been arranged by Weydemeyer.

But now the most remarkable thing of all.

Cremer, **our Honorary General Secretary**, had received a written invitation for the '**Council'** as well as a private visit, from a **Provisional Committee** which is meeting *privatim* at the London Tavern next Monday. Object: **Monster meeting** for **Manhood Suffrage**. *Chairman: — Richard Cobden!*

The point is this: as E. Jones told us previously, these fellows have been a complete failure in Manchester. They have therefore adopted **a broader platform**, in which **registration 'for paying poor rate'** figured instead of **Manhood Suffrage**, however. That is what is stated in the printed circular sent to us. However, since various indications made it clear to them that nothing less than **Manhood Suffrage** can attract **any co-operation whatever on the part of the working classes**, they have announced they are prepared to accept the latter. A *big* demonstration in London would lead to similar ones in the provinces, write the provincials 'yet once again', having 'all ready' realised that they are not able **to set the ball a-going**.

The next question raised yesterday was this: should our **Society, i.e. Council**, agree to what these fellows want (they include all the old **sham city agitators** such as Sam. Morley, etc.) and send a few delegates to attend the transactions of their provisional committee as 'watchmen'? Secondly, if these fellows pledge themselves *directly* to the slogan of **manhood suffrage** and the **public meeting** is being called under this slogan, should we promise our support? *The latter* is, you see, just as crucial to these fellows as it was in the American business. Without the **Trades Unions**, no mass **meeting** is possible, and without us, the **Trades Unions** are not to be had. This is also the reason why these gentlemen have come to us.

Opinions were *very* divided, for which *Bright's* latest silly tricks in Birmingham were much to blame.

On my motion, it was decided that: 1) the delegation should be sent (in my motion, I excluded **foreigners** from it; but Eccarius and Lubez were elected on to it as 'Englishmen' and *silent* witnesses) just as 'observers'; 2) **so far as the meeting is concerned**, we should act with them *firstly* if **manhood suffrage** is proclaimed directly and publicly in the programme, and *secondly* if people *selected by us* are included on the *permanent* committee, so that they can keep an eye on those fellows and compromise them in the event of fresh treachery, which, as I made plain to all of them, is *at any rate intended.* I am writing to E. Jones about the matter today.

Your
K. M.