---
id: MECW42-114
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, November 21, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 November 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 and in the language of the original, English, in: *Wilhelm Liebknecht. Briefwechsel mit Karl Marx und Fried"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG[1]

[London,] 21 November 1865

My dear Miller,[2]

Since the conference[3] held at this place I fell again very sick. Afterwards I had to leave London for family affairs.[4] Hence my protracted silence. As to your report, I could *not* lay it before the conference, because I was too personally introduced in it.[5] As to your Berlin speech, there were some very disagreeable blunders in it which could only emanate from yourself, because they alluded to facts only known to you, but half forgotten and wrongly reproduced by you.[6] But this is a thing of the past.

I have received the Berlin letter, and I shall answer to it.[7] I have at present neither the *time* nor the means to go to Berlin. Even if I could, you know very well that all and every sort of agitation would be out of the question. The Prussian government has not in vain declared that the amnesty, as far as I was concerned, still excluded me from Prussia, and only gave me leave to travel as a Foreigner through the Bismarckian world.[8]

*The Workman's Advocate* I shall send you one of these days some numbers of. You can write to it on *every* subject you please, social or political. Till now it is a paper of good will, but very mediocre still. Of course, myself had and have not yet the time to contribute to it, although I am one of its Directors.[9] (By my continual relapse into damned ill health I was forced to interrupt the finishing of my book[10] and must now apply to it all my time, part of which is, with all that, absorbed by the International Associa- tion.) Engels has promised to contribute[11] but not yet done so. And the same is the case with other people.

The Conference has resolved that a *Public Congress* is to take place at the end of May, at Geneva. A programme of questions to be there debated, has been resolved upon.[12] But nobody can assist who does not belong to a society connected with us, and being sent as a delegate of such society. I now call upon you *very seriously* (I shall do the same at Mayence through Stumpf, and shall write to the Berliners[13] on it) to enter the Association with some men, few or many, we do not care. I shall send you *cards* which I have prepaid, so that you can *give them away.* But now work! Every *society* (whatever its number) can enbody itself by paying 5 shilling in the block. The *cards,* on the contrary, which cost each 1 shilling, give the right of *individual* membership, which is important for all workingmen going to Foreign countries. But treat this money matter as quite secondary. The principal thing is to get up members, individual or societies, in Germany. On the congress, *Solingen* was the only place represented (they had given power of delegation to our old friend Becker,[14] whom you are very mistaken in if you consider him as a tool of Megära Hatzfeldt).

The programme (of questions to be lead before Congress) I shall send you in my next letter. All the Paris liberal and republican papers have made great fuss about our Association. *Henri Martin,* the well known historian, had a most enthusiastic leader about it in the *Siècle]*[15]

I have heard nothing of *Quenstedt*[16]

A thing which will rather surprise you, is this: Shortly before the arrival of workingmen's letter from Berlin, I received from that very same place—**centre et foyer des lumières',**[17] of course — a letter on the part of— *Lothar Bucher,* inviting me to become the London money article writer of the *Preussische Staatsanzeiger,* and giving me to understand that everybody, der noch bei Lebzeiten im Staat wirken will, 'sich an die Regierung ralliiren' muss.[18] I have answered him by a few lines which he is not likely to exhibit.[19] Of course, you must not *publish* in the papers this affair, but you can communicate it, under the seal of discretion, to your friends.

Freiligrath's London shop—viz. the London branch of the Bank of Switzerland — will be shut up, never to be opened again, before 1866.[20]

Give my best compliments to Madame and Alice.[21]

Yours truly

A. Williams[22]

Some curious letters, written long time since, during his stay at London, by Bernhard Becker to Dr Rode have fallen into my hands.

I have opened this letter again, and by that operation somewhat torn it, in order to add that, during the past spring I had sent a letter to Dr Kugelmann, together with cards of membership for our Association.[23] I have received *no answer* on his part.[24] The letter of which you speak has never arrived at my hands. Please, write him on this affair. If he writes to me, let him do so under the address of '*A. Williams, Esq.',* and not the other one.