---
id: MECW42-088
title: "Letter to Eleanor Marx, July 3, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "3 July 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published in Russian in *Voinstvuyushchy materialist,* Book 4, 1925 and in English in *The Socialist Review* (London), No. 44, September 1929 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works,"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ELEANOR MARX

IN LONDON

[London,] 3 July 1865

Maiden Tower

Dear Miss Lilliput!

You must excuse the 'belated' character of my answer. I belong to that sort of people who always look twice at things before they decide one way or the other. Thus I was rather startled on receiving an invitation on the part of a female minx, quite unknown to me. However, having ascertained your respectability, and the high tone of your transactions with your tradespeople, I shall feel happy to seize this rather strange opportunity of getting at your eatables and drinkables. But, pray, don't neglect the latter, as spinsters usually have bad taste of doing. Suffering somewhat under an attack of rheumatism, I hope you keep your reception room clear of anything like draught. As to the ventilation required, I shall provide for it myself. Being somewhat deaf in the right ear, please put a dull fellow, of whom, I dare say, your company will not be in want, at my right side. For the left, I hope you will reserve your female beauty; I mean the best-looking female amongst your guests.

I am somewhat given to tobacco-chewing, so have the stuff ready. Having from former intercourse with Yankees taken to the habitude of spitting, I hope spittoons will not be missing. Being rather easy in my manners, and disgusted at this hot and close English atmosphere, you must prepare for seeing me in a dress

rather adonistic. I hope your female guests are somewhat in the same line.

Adieu, my dear unknown little minx.

Yours for ever

Doctor Crankey

*No British wines,* I hope!