---
id: MECW42-044
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, February 13, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 February 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 13 February 1865

Dear Moor,

Your SUGGESTIONS came just in time yesterday and have both been used. How necessary the one about the demands of the louts in particular was,[2] was further brought home to me by Nos. 20 and 21 of the Sow's-Dirt[3] which arrived today.

By the by, our attitude seems to be bearing fruit in spite of everything. There is a certain revolutionary note in No. 21 which was entirely absent before. By the by, I've written to Liebknecht that there's no point in raising a storm, they must just drop their flirting with reaction and make sure the aristocracy and reaction get their SHARE, too, but for the rest *abuse* neither them nor the bourgeoisie, which is superfluous in quiet times.[4]

But one can see that Izzy[5] has given the movement a Tory-Chartist character,[6] which it will be difficult to get rid of and which has given rise to a tendency in Germany which was previously unheard of among the workers. This nauseating toadying to the reaction comes through everywhere. WE SHALL HAVE SOME TROUBLE WITH THAT. You wait and see, the louts will be saying, what's that Engels after, what has he been doing all the time, how can he speak in our name and tell us what to do, the fellow's up there in Manchester exploiting the workers, etc. To be sure, I don't give a damn about it now, but it's bound to come, and we shall have Baron Izzy to thank for it.

Your

F. E.