---
id: MECW42-313
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, January 6, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 January 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 6 January 1868

Dear Moor,

If you do not want to take arsenic, then for goodness sake do something else, for things cannot go on *like this.* Have you consulted Allen or another doctor recently? Gumpert was not at home when I called the other day, but I shall take the first opportunity to speak to him.

You did not send the *Beobachter* or the 2 Urquharts either.[1] However, today Kugelmann sent me the *Beobachter* and the Württemberg *Staats-Anzeiger* (I am sending you the latter and when I get it back will send it to Meissner, if you do not send it to him direct). It's fine that these two PAPERS have risen to the bait. I shall now also prepare Kugelmann something for the *Schwäbischer Merkur.*[2]

Schorlemmer will put together the information for you from the latest annual reports. He was not acquainted with the book by Fraas.[3]

A natural scientist has appeared in Paris who calls himself *Chmoulevitch* (Schmulsohn!). This even beats Ephraim Artful.

The first instalment of the Austrian official general staff report on the war of 66 first proves that Austria's military organisation was not fit for a simultaneous war with Prussia and Italy, this is followed by the naive passage: Under these circumstances it should really have been the task of state foreign policy to safeguard the state against such a war.[4]

The *Prussian* 2nd instalment[5] shows quite clearly that on the 28th, and even more on the evening of the 29th,^g Benedek was in a position to attack the scattered columns of the Crown Prince[6] with superior force and *with almost absolute certainty* to throw *him* back into the mountains and take his guns. The jackass did not do it, and lost the campaign.

*Salut.*

Your

F. E.