---
id: MECW42-151
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, April 6, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 April 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN MARGATE

Manchester, 6 April 1866

Dear Moor,

That the Russians are behind the Prussians at once struck me as very probable, too. The mere fact that the Austrian paper guilder is almost at par again and will thus have to be disturbed again, aroused suspicion, but the simultaneous Cuza affair[1] even more so, and *ce cher*[2] Bismarck would not have put out all his efforts if he did not have the Russians behind him. It is possible that things are so far committed already that neither Bismarck nor that old jackass William have a say in the matter any more and that it depends entirely on the whim of the St Petersburgers whether there shall be war or peace. How clumsily this Bismarck is acting, incidentally. It is too absurd how he tries to represent the poor Austrians as the attacking party. Even more splendid, however, is the fact that the fellow is seriously thinking of convening a German parliament *on 1 June* to reform the federal constitution. This is to be a remedy against the smaller states: he—*lui* Bismarck—is appealing to the people instead of to the governments. That even called forth universal derisive laughter from the German philistines.[3]

After the upheaval that has occurred on *The Commonwealth,*"[4] by the way, I was no longer able to get the said articles[5] to the editors on time, as they would have had to take the roundabout route via Margate, so I am sending them to you for the next number. I found the relevant data on the emancipation of the Russian serfs in an article by Mazade, *Revue des II Mondes.*"[6]

And how is your health now? You haven't had any further carbuncles or small furuncles? And how are you otherwise, are you building yourself up? Are you still visiting old **Cantuar"" per pedes'**^1*? The arsenic must be taken for at least 3 months, and will not do you the slightest harm anyway.*

Otherwise, there is nothing new here except for a foul east wind and clouds of dust.

How much longer are you thinking of staying in Margate? At least until the end of this month, I hope?

Reform movement—general admission of general indolence. What a tiny INSTALMENT! 31D

Your

F. E.