---
id: MECW42-015
title: "Letter to Sophie von Hatzfeldt, November 24, 1864"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 November 1864"
year: 1864
publication: "First published in *International Review of Social History,* Vol. XXVII, Assen, 1982 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

MARX TO SOPHIE VON HATZFELDT

IN BERLIN

London, 24 November 1864

1 Modena Villas, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

My dear Countess,

I have just informed you by telegraph'[1] (to avoid all delay in reply) of my view that the two photograms of von R. *et* Co.[2] should, *in no circumstances,* appear together with Lassalle's in the pamphlet. It would, on the one hand, dishonour the deceased, and, on the other, give the publication a gaudy appearance which should be avoided completely. Furthermore, as you know,[3] *contra hostem vindicatio aeterna sit* is my motto too, but, for revenge to be successfully executed, it is advisable *not* to initiate the public in one's vindictive **intent'.**[4][5]Ex ossibus ultor' would seem to me the best title for Lassalle's portrait. They were also my *last words* spoken at the graveside of my never-to-be-forgotten friend W. Wolff[6] some six months ago.

As regards ex-student *Blind,* that fellow who made himself known before 1848 by peddling Heinzen's nonsense and as the[7] *homme entretenu* of the wife of the Jewish banker Cohen[8] (whom he later married in London), so I would ask you to remember that in my piece *Herr Vogt* (see pp. 58-69 and *Appendices* 9 and 11)[9] I do not merely describe this student Blind as a **deliberate liar',* but I prove by reference to *legal documents* that this wretched man fabricated ****false witness'* to cast suspicion on myself and to extricate his neck from a noose that this creature had made for himself for the purpose of *merely making himself look big* (which is indeed this rascal's sole purpose in every public step, or rather crawl, he undertakes).[10]

Then Blind succeeded in deflecting the catastrophe of his political operations—by *simply saying nothing.* In this he was sustained firstly by the fact that *Freiligrath (this entre nous)* unfortunately continued to parade publicly as his friend, and that *Lassalle,* although I had strongly urged him to do so, neglected to force my pillorying of Blind[11] *d'une manière ou d'une autre* on the attention of the German public.[12] This appeared necessary to me because the liberal press in Germany instinctively took the side of a scoundrel like Blind, and therefore sought to hush up my attack. Lassalle considered Blind too insignificant. It was only later that he discovered that there are times when one cannot decline a 'combat with a flea'.[13]

When Lassalle was here in London,[14] he sought to enlighten Louis Blanc and Mazzini about Blind on his personal visits to them, but in vain. The man is exactly what Mazzini, Ledru, etc., had hoped, but failed, to find in the other Germans of standing, a servile lackey and sycophant. Through his relations with these people he makes the English think that he represents Germany, and he impresses the Germans by his boasting here. Yet the whole of this fellow's activity consists in writing, in conjunction with 3 or 4 South Germans,[15] *from, for and about 'Karl Blind'* and, at every possible opportunity, to force on the English, Germans and Americans his 'unofficial judgment' as the self-appointed representative of **German republicanism** (a party, which is well known to exist only on the moon, since the German bourgeois is interested in a constitutional monarchy, the feudal lord in an aristocratic monarchy, and the worker in general not in *mere forms of state,* but in the form of state as the expression of economic social conditions, and, at all events, has never recognised ex-student Blind as representative). He is a true master of dictating letters to one of his 6 satellites,[16] in which they call on the said, etc., 'Karl Blind' to do this or that, or congratulate him on this or that, and then—by oversight or OTHERWISE—the replies from the same Karl Blind gain entry to the press.

As one of the 'YOUNG MEN' who were active in the service of F. Hecker, Blind learnt that art, which is by no means rare among the South Germans, of self-defamation and creating a spurious PUBLIC OPINION about people who are essentially nonentities. In London he thought himself far enough advanced along the road or to have served long enough in the 'Democratic cause' to exploit for himself those arts he had acquired in the service of others.

Regarding his education, it is, as I told Lassalle during his sojourn here, that of a[17] *Baden publican,* who has read Rotteck's *Weltgeschichte,* Welker's *Staatslexikon* and Mr Struve's republican Almanac.[18]

In his manoeuvres in Germany Mr Blind enjoys the particular support of Mr *Gustav Rasch* of Berlin.

Bernhard Becker, as the former SUBEDITOR of the London *Hermann,* best knows how Blind composed *with his own fair hand* the paeans of praise to himself that appeared e.g. in the *Hermann.* He does this mostly and on average. By way of variation he will occasionally get a certain *Dr Bronner* in Bradford or his *Schaible* (see **Herr Vogt')* via London to put their names to *his* epistles. All the agitation of this person is nothing but a tissue of lies, self-deception and hot air. In this field, however, he has no rivals. He demonstrated the height of his dexterity when Garibaldi visited London.)[19] He first spread the rumour in the English papers that he was an *intimate* friend of Garibaldi. Imposing himself as is his custom, he issued 'addresses' to Garibaldi from London and you know that in his kind-hearted naivety Garibaldi will write a nice letter back to anyone. Then he descends on the Isle of Wight (before Garibaldi made his ceremonial entry to London), and 'appoints' with him the date on which Garibaldi would receive the German deputation (Blind, you see, had so arranged things as to get a few Germans, including Kinkel and *unfortunately* my friend Freiligrath as well, to elect him as the leader of a deputation) and at the same time sends mysterious hints to some London papers[20] that Garibaldi WAS *CLOSETED** WITH 'HIS FRIEND' (Blind) and, of course, settled some very important affairs of state with him.[21] But Blind's masterstroke is still to come. As serving-man to the European 'kings of democracy'[22] (for so he designates Mazzini, Ledru Rollin, Louis Blanc, and indeed COMPARED WITH student Blind even they are 'great men'[23], our Baden trickster manages so to arrange things that he, as a member of the society and a leader, fetches Garibaldi from the Duke of Sutherland's, where he is staying, and escorts him in the Duke's State Carriage to Ledru Rollin and Louis Blanc. He seizes the opportunity to have the carriage stand for a while outside Mr Blind's house for Garibaldi to 'PAY HIS COMPLIMENTS TO Madame Karl Blind'. By skilful MANAGEMENT all this even appears in *The Times,*[24] and at the moment when Garibaldi is being idolized by all London. Perhaps you recall how 'Rameau', the nephew, in Diderot's wonderful piece, bursts out in admiration at the genius of Bouret, the general tax-collector, who cunningly devised a way to disaffect his little dog from himself and make it prefer the minister! This Garibaldi-farce was Blind's Bouret-prank! It is my belief that from that time on he began *bona fide* to think himself a great man! He has really got hold of something with Schleswig-Holstein! Did you not know then that for years Blind has been deriving his chief importance from acting as a 'representative' for Schleswig-Holstein against Denmark, saying 'he' had 'forced' the German tyrants into war against Denmark, and that was why friend Rasch dedicated his piece about the 'orphaned' kith and kin[25] to him! Did you not know that in the Prussian House Prof. Virchow (probably at Mr Rasch's instigation) cited Blind's great influence in the Schleswig-Holstein affair[26] as proof of what a single man can do by his own efforts for a whole nation! The shameless man had made those German jackasses believe that he had got the English to change their view of Schleswig-Holstein! His feeble leaflets about Schleswig-Holstein are just about (and that is saying something) the most stupid thing that has appeared in this LINE. (Incidentally, Mr ex-student's best friend and associate is that lout Karl Heinzen in America, whose business for 20 years past has been to slander me in a manner such as even Lassalle never experienced. I have *never* thought it worth the trouble to reply to this fellow, but I was astonished that the *Nordstern*—for a long time also a major mouthpiece for student Blind—is *constantly* printing Heinzen's filth, which is extremely hostile to the principles of the workers' party, and generally makes propaganda for Mr Heinzen.)

But Garibaldi, Schleswig-Holstein, America, Lassalle, all are for the ex-student only a pretext for puffing up his own self-importance! The modest fellow wrote in his own fair hand a short while ago to the **Glasgow Sentinel** that the whole of Europe (literally) was not yet divided into two hostile camps with regard to 'Karl Blind', but that a *tiers parti* existed in this respect, too![27] In *The Observer* he describes himself as 'THE ILLUSTRIOUS CHIEF OF THE *GERMAN REPUBLICANS'.'[28] A few more little touches to the description of this man, who, if one views him aright, is a *highly comical character.**

After his success with Garibaldi MR KARL BLIND JOINED THE SHAKESPEARE COMMITTEE,[29] as was stated in the *Athenaeum*[30] He had now clearly progressed to the status of 'literary' representative of Germany, too!

During the skirmish in Baden (1849),[31] Struve, as he himself recounts in a piece about the 'Baden revolution',[32] sent the 'young man', as he calls Blind, as Under-Secretary to Schütz, who had been appointed Secretary, from Mainz to Paris, to rescue ex-student Blind from conflict with Brentano. The government to which Blind was directed as Under-Secretary to Secretary Schütz,— the *provisional government no longer existed* when Secretary and Under-Secretary arrived in Paris. Nevertheless, in mysterious hints in English papers, he let it be understood that he held an important diplomatic post as agent of the German 'republican government' in Paris!

In the first few years after 1849 he lived in *Belgium* with his present wife. Since this woman has children from her marriage to the dead banker (and they inherited) and she also has children by Blind (at that time still illegitimate), a court in Baden ruled that Cohen's children should be taken away from his widow Cohen because of her 'immoral' relations with ex-student Blind. The court in Brussels gave this ruling legal force in Belgium, and this caused Blind to flee to England together with his wife and the children. He later got English papers to print (and was brazen enough to boast *publicly* of it on a visit to South Germany) that he had been *expelled* from Belgium for political reasons![33]

His next deed you will see from the enclosed cutting, which he had printed in many London papers. What provoked it was the report disseminated in some papers that Garibaldi had declared his support for the *slave-owners!* Blind used this to extort a short letter from Garibaldi with 'CORDIAL GREETINGS FOR MRS BLIND'. YOU can see what lies he told Garibaldi from his remark 'I THANK YOU FOR YOUR GOOD NEWS'.[34] What on earth could this 'GOOD NEWS' have been in October 1864? Blind was obviously writing Garibaldi the most monstrous lies about the progress of 'republicanism' in Germany, which is presumably just awaiting Blind's arrival to lash out.

The most splendid aspect of the affair is that the London paper to which Blind is a regular contributor, the *mouthpiece of the publicans* (a most appropriate context to a 'Blind'), is a fanatical supporter of the Confederates! And by the by, the paper— *The Morning Advertiser*—is at one and the same time the mouthpiece of spirits, the Low CHURCH (English pietism),[35] the SWELL-MOB which is concerned with gambling, PRICEFIGHTS AND SO FORTH, and the most lickspittling poodle of Palmerston's. FROM A LITERARY STANDPOINT, it cannot be counted among the English daily press and is in general only read in TAPROOMS.

So much for the man. In Lassalle's lifetime he issued an address casting doubt on the former's integrity.[36] But Lassalle—as far as I know—did not think it worth the trouble of a reply. I was only surprised that B. Becker, who is fully aware of Blind's doings, did not then take the opportunity to blazon abroad[37] *my revelations about Blind?*

One of the reasons why I have joined the International Working Men's Association here is to expose that man. After the statements I have made against Blind, branding him as a **deliberate liar'* and a ****falsifier of evidence',* I cannot of course further involve myself in polemic against the fellow. I reserve the right to treat him as a *figure of comedy* should the occasion arise. If I should now take his scrawl against Lassalle, which I have incidentally *not seen,* as grounds for an attack on him, people here, who know of my implacable hostility to Blind, will think that in fact I am only using Lassalle's name as a pretext for personal spite.

But do send me the (printed) declaration by the workers. I shall ensure that it gets into a *German* paper here and if student Blind then makes any further moves, perhaps he will give me the opportunity to let me fall upon him.

At all events, you may depend on it that he will be shown *no* favours. In the meantime, the best thing you can do is to disseminate my revelations about Blind as a **deliberate liar** and **falsifier** as far as possible *in Germany.* (If his scrawl about Lassalle had set any mice stirring here, a word or two about it *at all events* would have reached my ears.) This would force him to break his silence and so enable me to open my mouth again concerning a fellow whom I have *publicly* declared to be *atrocious.*

Apart from anything else, it would be quite impossible for me to travel to Berlin on account of the fresh outbreak of the fearful carbuncle disease that I have been struggling against for 14 months with slight interruptions.

You may, however, be sure that I shall seize whatever opportunity I find appropriate (but you will have to leave it to me to choose whatever moment appears favourable to me) to rebuff all malicious attacks on the friend who has been prematurely taken from me.

Yours very respectfully

K. M.