---
id: MECW42-010
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 14, 1864"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 November 1864"
year: 1864
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 22; First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 14 November 1864**

Dear Engels,

I have had to stay mainly *in bed* for almost a week on account of the carbuncle. The thing is now *healing up.* However, as the carbuncle is just below the breast, I still have trouble leaning forward in order to write. So, to keep it as brief as possible:

1. Please send the *enclosed* letters addressed to me back to me (both the one from Schweitzer and the one from Liebknecht) and reply *by return,* as the people need our reply as soon as possible.

My view is that we should *promise* occasional contributions from time to time. It is important for us to have a mouthpiece in Berlin, especially for the sake of the association I was involved in founding in London, and for the sake of the book [Capital] I am planning to publish. It is also important that whatever we do, we do it *together.*

If you agree with me, you can *send* me a few lines for these chaps, or say in a few lines what statement *I* am to make in your name.

2. You will receive the '**Address'** along with the '**Provisional Rules'** etc., in a few days. The thing was not quite so difficult as you think, because we are dealing with 'workers' all the time. The only **literary man** in the Association is the Englishman, Peter Fox, a writer and **agitator** who is, at the same time, one of the people from *The National Reformer* (atheist but anti-Holyoake). I am sending you the very kind note he passed on to me concerning the '**Address'.** Mazzini is **rather disgusted** that his people are among the signatories, *mais il faut faire bonne mine a mauvais jeu* [one has to grin and bear it]*.*

3. Your stuff from the *Guardian* I find most valuable. I had already pieced this abomination together from the '**Factory Reports**', but only in a most laborious and fragmentary fashion.

4. 2 **copies** received from the Manchester **solicitor** for signing, etc. In a day or two, I shall send you the signed copies, along with the list (inventory), etc., which you will then have to record. Of course, I can no longer reel off a complete list of all the stuff we left in the flat, etc., and put a value on it.

That old **humbug** McCulloch has died. I hope the British Museum buys up his **economical library**. But no doubt Edinburgh will get in first.

*Salut.*

Your
K. M.

I have just come across P. Fox's letter, which I am enclosing; please send it back as soon as you have had time to peruse it.