---
id: MECW42-189
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 26, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 September 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 26 September 1866

DEAR FRED,

Receipt enclosed for Moore (I only got the receipt from Dell yesterday).[2]

Mr *Sawyer,* the LANDLORD, has also written me letter that the 3 quarters (£46) are due on 2 October. I have not received a FARTHING from Holland yet and so cannot count on that.

[3][4]

By way of demonstration against the French monsieurs—who wanted to exclude everyone except **travailleurs manuels'*[5] in the first instance from membership of the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION, or at least from eligibility for election as delegate to the congress— the English yesterday proposed *me* as *President of the CENTRAL COUNCIL. I* declared that under *no* circumstances could I accept such a thing, and proposed *Odger* in my turn, who was then in fact re-elected, although some people voted for me despite my declaration. Dupont, incidentally, has given me the key to the Tolain and Fribourg operation. They want to stand as *workers** candidates for the Corps législatif in 1869, on the 'principle' that *only workers* can represent the workers. That is why it was exceedingly important for these gentlemen to get this principle proclaimed through the Congress.[6]

At yesterday's meeting of the CENTRAL COUNCIL there were all manner of dramatic scenes. E.g., Mr Cremer fell to earth with a bump when Fox was appointed General Secretary in his stead. He controlled his fury only with great difficulty. Another scene when Mr Le Lubez had to be officially informed of his expulsion from the CENTRAL COUNCIL *par décret*[7] of the congress. He gave vent to the turmoil in his breast in an hour-long speech, in which he spat fire and brimstone at the Parisians, represented himself in terms of astonishing self-esteem and mumbled all manner of dubious things about intrigues whereby the nationalities who were well-disposed towards him (Belgium and Italy) were prevented from attending the congress. Finally, he demanded a vote of confidence from the Central Council[8] —and this will be discussed next Tuesday.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.