---
id: MECW42-270
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, October 14, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 October 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published slightly abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA* Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Printed according to the original Pub"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 October 1867

Dear FRED,

You will see from the enclosed letter No. II from Juch that, although Achilles[1] is dead, Beta is still alive. Juch's letter was probably provoked by the fact that Beta speaks well of Kinkel but not Freiligrath, and that Beta's article also contains some malicious remarks directed at Juch. When Freiligrath and Juch form an alliance, they are incapable of producing even a bad joke. For which reason I am to be incited to action, being 'thoroughly venomous', as Beta calls me in that vile scrawl of an article he wrote: 'Die Deutschen in London', which begins with the Norman Conquest and ends with that oily Jew Bender as the sole epitome of mankind in England.

This is about the 6th time now that Mr Juch has offered me his stale columns[2] for the purpose of 'self-glorification', for him a well proven tactic which he has used, successfully of course, with Blind, Kinkel, Freiligrath, and Heintzmann. I wrote him a few lines only.[3] And *not* to Mr. Freiligrath's *liking* either. I told him *privatim* of what happened at Beta's *How do you do?* editorial office when I went there in the company of Ziegenhainer, Freiligrath, and our W. Wolff.[4] So as to give him one bad joke for his trouble, I told him that I would not allow Kinkel the credit for being more than the a and o> to this Beta.

Typical of Juch: he sends me Payne's people's calendar[5] which contains the *corpus delicti* (like all such abominations in Germany, *Gartenlaube,* etc., this calendar has 250,000 subscribers), along with the inevitable invoice for lid., which I immediately enclosed with my reply. Though admittedly he was once more on the threshold of the BANKRUPTCY COURT and has with great difficulty SETTLED with his creditors for monthly payments of 2s. 6d. in the £.

How shall I answer the enclosed from Nahmer?[6]

Has Borkheim sent you the *Courrier français* with the translation of my preface?[7] I am asking because POOR Lafargue is on tenterhooks for 'your verdict'—every day. The Belgian *Liberté* arrived today, having ditto printed the *préface,* with very 'fulsome' PREAMBLE,[8] in which it reminds the Belgian government of my EXPULSION.

I had already replied to Liebknecht, but had to write to him again today because I only today received the 2 ACTS relating to the TRADE UNIONS COMMISSION.[9] Your tips attached to my letter.

*Salut* COMPLIMENTS TO MRS BURNS.

Your

Moro