---
id: MECW42-147
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 24, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 March 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

Margate, 24 March 1866

5 Lansell's Place

Dear FRED,

The belated arrival of this letter will tell you how 'professionally' I am applying my time here. I am reading nothing, am writing nothing. The mere fact of having to take the arsenic three times a day obliges one to arrange one's time for meals and for strolling by the sea and over the adjacent HILLS in such a way that one finds 'no time' for anything else. And in the evening one is too tired to do anything other than sleep. The weather is, by and large, rather raw, and in particular there is often an east wind blowing here, which is SOMEWHAT CHILLING, but one soon becomes accustomed to that, too. You can tell how much I am restored from the fact that last Sunday I marched *per pedes*'[2] to Canterbury (17 miles from here) in less than 4 hours. As regards company here, it does not exist, of course. I can sing with the MILLER OF THE DEE:[3]I CARE FOR

NOBODY AND NOBODY CARES FOR ME.'

The day before yesterday[4] I had to go to London in the evening to attend a 'soirée' of my daughters. My uncle[5] had sent them £ 5 at Christmas, which was, however, 'borrowed' from them for *GENERAL PURPOSES* and which they only got back when your money arrived. Thev arranged their annual 'PARTY' with it and so bombarded me with letters that I 'made' for London, as Mr Nothjung used to say. But I returned to my hermitage here the very next morning (i. e., yesterday).

Before setting off for Margate (which I did on Wednesday, 14 March)[6], I had to attend the consecutive evening meetings, on 12 and 13 March, firstly of the SHAREHOLDERS of *The Commonwealth*[7]

and secondly, on the 13th, of the CENTRAL COUNCIL, although still in a thoroughly wretched condition at the time.

On the former occasion Mr Cremer had set everything up for Eccarius to be given his marching orders, which would probably

have happened if I had not appeared. So, the meeting only achieved the 'voluntary' resignation of Mr Cremer from the editorial board. How the matter turned out later, I do not know, since the whole thing was only SETTLED 'provisionally' for one week, and the general SHAREHOLDERS-MEETING was deferred to 19 March. But it will probably mean *beati possidentes*[8] here too, and as a result of that meeting Eccarius was, to begin with, the *possidetis*.[9]

T h e intrigue on the CENTRAL COUNCIL was closely bound u p with the RIVALRIES and JEALOUSIES concerning the journal (Mr Howell wished to be EDITOR-IN-CHIEF and Mr Cremer ditto). Mr Le Lubez had used this to agitate against

GERMAN INFLUENCE, and at the meeting of 6 March a beautifully and quietly prepared scene took place. T o wit, Major Wolff suddenly appeared and made a solemn speech in his own name and in Mazzini's and in that of the ITALIAN SOCIETY[10] against the reply to Vesinier's attacks, which J u n g had sent to the *Echo de Verviers* in the name of the CENTRAL COUNCIL.[11]

H e made a very violent attack on J u n g and *(impliciter*)[12] myself. Odger, Howell, Cremer, and others gave vent to their longstand- ing Mazzinism. Le Lubez fed the flames and, AT ALL EVENTS, a resolution was passed which included what amounted to an *amende honorable*[13] for Mazzini, Wolff, etc. It was a serious matter, as you can see. (Of the FOREIGNERS, there were only A FEW PRESENT, and none of them voted.) It would really be a neat trick of Mazzini's to let me bring the Association so far and then to appropriate it for himself. H e demanded that the English should recognise him as leader of the continental democrats, as though it was for the English gentlemen to appoint leaders for *us\*

On Saturday (10 March) the FOREIGN SECRETARIES of the Association gathered at my house to hold a council of war (Dupont, Jung, Longuet, Lafargue, Bobczyriski). It was resolved that, whatever happened, I was to attend the COUNCIL on Tuesday (13th) and *protest* against the PROCEEDINGS in the name of *all* the FOREIGN- SECRETARIES. T h e PROCEEDINGS were irregular, you see, as Wolff is n o longer a MEMBER OF THE COUNCIL, therefore n o resolution on a matter in which he was personally implicated ought to be passed in his presence. Furthermore, I was to explain Mazzini's position vis-à-vis both o u r Association and the CONTINENTAL WORKINGMENS PARTIES, etc. Finally, the French were to bring Cesare Orsini (who is BY THE BY a personal friend of Mazzini) along to give EVIDENCE on Mazzini, Wolff and the STATE OF SOCIALISM' in Italy.

T h e affair went off better than I had ever expected 3 1 3; though the English element was unfortunately not well represented (on account of the bloody Reform League 1 5 5). I gave that Lubez a thorough dressing down. In any case, it has been made clear to the English (in fact only a minority is meant here, too) that the whole CONTINENTAL ELEMENT stands behind me as one man and that here it is by no means, as Mr Lubez had insinuated, a case of *GERMAN* INFLUENCE. Lubez had sought to put it to them that as LEADER of the *ENGLISH* ELEMENT on the COUNCIL, I was holding DOWN the other *CONTINENTAL* ELEMENTS; the English gentlemen are, on the contrary, now persuaded that by means of the CONTINENTAL ELEMENT I have got *them* entirely under my thumb, should they kick over the traces. More about that next time.

Before coming here, I did, of course, pay off the most pressing DEBTS at home, as otherwise I should not have had a moment's peace of mind. If you can send me a little bit more at the end of this month, I would appreciate it. Meanwhile, the power of attorney from the Cape[14] will be here at last, and thus something will at least be flowing into the coffers, even if it is not very much.

MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS LIZZY.[15]

Your

K. M.