---
id: MECW42-120
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, January 4, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 January 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 4 January 1866[1]

Dear Moor,

£10 encl. in 2 Bank-of-England notes. How stands it with bill of exchange for LANDLORD? Tell me how much and date when due, so that I may make my dispositions.

That malicious compilation of *Social-Demokrat* garbage in the Schulze-Delitzschite pamphlet[2] had already been sent me anonym- ously from Berlin; it is always a good thing to have such a résumé with extracts. Schulze-Delitzsch has also announced that in the next few days he is to publish a reply to Lassalle, in which he is going to demolish him. 72

You will already know as well that Racowija died of consump- tion, so presumably Mamsell Dönniges is once more IN THE MARKET, IF

EVER SHE WAS FAIRLY OUT OF IT.

Mr Held's speech has also been sent me from Berlin. He's a real Berlin scoundrel.

Monsieur Bonaparte's progress is most decidedly that of the crab. The trouble in the army over Mexico[3] is very serious, and so is the student trouble in Paris.[4] It is very important that the Paris students should take the side of the proletariat, confused though their ideas on the subject may be. The École polytechnique will follow soon enough. It would be so splendid if the rascal lived to see his own DOWNFALL, and it now almost appears that he might. It is getting more and more rotten for Bismarck every day, too, and, if those scoundrels in Cologne had not got him out of the soup, it would probably already have been all up with him now.[5]

I am agog for the next parliament, the disintegration of the old parties must surely proceed apace now. JOHN BRIGHT IS EVIDENTLY BIDDING FOR OFFICE—it is true, I have not yet read the speech he gave yesterday.[6]

Have you read Tyndall's 'HEAT CONSIDERED AS A MODE OF MOTION'? If not, you should d o so. A great deal of work has been done in this field, and the matter appears to be assuming a rational shape; the atom theory is being taken to such extremes that it must soon fall apart.

Please don't forget to send me *The Workman's Advocate* and *The Free Press.*

Regards and best wishes to your family for the New Year.

Your

F. E.