---
id: MECW42-137
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 5, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 March 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 5 March 1866

Dear Moor,[1]

Gumpert is *décidément*[2] of the opinion that, just as soon as your condition allows, you should go to the seaside for at least 4 weeks and in any case have a change of air. Now what do you think of that? Would you prefer to go to a seaside resort near here (Lytham, or Blackpool or New Brighton perhaps) or on the south coast? Make your MIND up about it, and if the former, then come up here. I shall raise the money for the purpose and, as I promised you, a bit more as well. These constantly recurring carbuncles have really just got to stop, or you will be unable either to work or to do anything else. So, you must reach a decision.

You yourself disrupted my contributions for *The Commonwealth* by asking for something on Prussia as well as on the Polish business.[3] As a result, the one was interrupted and the other not completed in time either. I was suddenly collared to CANVASS for the money for the Schiller Institute[4] which I told you about, and that kept me off it every evening last week, and I have to go out again now.[5] I expect to have got that behind me in a fortnight but, at all events, to dispatch an article on Poland this week.

Fine revelations from Jamaica. And what an embarrassment they are to *The Times,* as well as Russell's resignation. The paper is going DOWN very rapidly.[6]

If possible, you must read the statement by the Cologne-Minden directors about their shady deal. They say that insofar as they are party to it, it is *in law* just a *private arrangement;* as soon as the King[7] ratifies it, *he* will have to sort out the constitutional side. In other words, the bourgeoisie in Cologne themselves do not want to

Kind regards to the LADIES.

Your

F. E.