---
id: MECW42-072
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 11, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "11 April 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 139; First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

Dear **Fred**,

Returned home some twenty-four hours ago. So, for the moment just a few lines to let you know.

Letter from Wilhelmchen enclosed. I sent him the **stamps** he asked for.

*Quoad* B. Becker, I didn't get to see his dirty work until I got here. But thought reply really was needed ['the "President of Mankind"']. (Rüstow and Herwegh have replied in the *Nordstern* on behalf of Hatzfeldt. Rüstow calls B. Becker a '*police-spy'.*) Sent it to *Rheinische* and *Düsseldorfer.* As soon as copies arrive, 1 for you.

I shall attend a **sitting** of the '**International**' this evening for the first time for 3 weeks. In the interval, revolution. Le Lubez and Denoual gone, Dupont **appointed French Secretary**. As a result of Le Lubez's intrigues, and more particularly those of Major Wolff who is **a tool** in Mazzini's hand, the Italian delegates Lama and Fontana have left. Pretext: Lefort (who has meanwhile announced his departure in the *journal L'Association*) must keep his post as **defender general in the Paris press**. The Italian **Working men's Club** has not withdrawn from the Association, but no longer has a **representative** on the **Council**. Meanwhile, I shall get Bakunin to lay some counter-mines for Mr Mazzini in Florence. The English **Shoemakers' Union** — 5,000 strong — has joined the Association during **my absence**.

How's the **cotton-crisis? I want information on that point**.

In great haste.

Your
K. M.