---
id: MECW42-039
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 6, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 February 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published (without Postscript) in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 February [1865]

Dear Engels,

As good luck would have it, in the feuilleton section in the *Social-Demokrat* which arrived today your call for the crushing of the aristocracy comes right after my article[1] condemning even a 'pseudo-compromise'.

In the first instance, I now believe it is better to send in the few lines below,[2] instead of the statement I had originally intended.[3]

They will inevitably provide the *occasion* for a *further statement.* But my 'aesthetic' sense tells me—on further reflection—that the latter would not be entirely appropriate, because it would come *too soon* after Becker's APPEAL.[4] These few lines, on the other hand, will *quite certainly* provoke a real tussle between Schweitzer and Red Becker etc., in which we can then intervene and declare *our* policy briefly, forcefully and *without any beating about the bush.*

I enclose letter from the unfortunate Liebknecht and note sent him by the old Hatzfeldt woman; there is still not enough 'Lassalle' in the paper[5] for her liking.

As TO Klings, I am not going to answer at all. Let the fellows manage by themselves.[6]

Letter from Schily just received (can only send it to you in a few days time), from which it emerges:

1. that Moses'[7] insinuations were pure invention, 2. that our plan will have a 'fantastic' effect in Paris, and the workers there are not taking any notice whatsoever of *L'Association,* which Mr A. Horn, Lob Sonnemann and other riff-raff use to indulge their self-importance.[8]

If the attached statement meets with your approval, make a copy of it and sign it. Then send it back. I will then put my name to it as well and post the thing to Berlin.

Apropos. Lincoln's answer to us is in today's *Times.*[9]

[Postscript]

Liebknecht's private address is: 13 Neuenburger Strasse, *Berlin*. You can send to *Mrs* Liebknecht at that address whenever you want to write privately. Poor W. Liebknecht is obviously in an exceedingly embarrassing situation. He will have to be told that it is a case of either bending or breaking. In the latter case, I should think he could certainly earn an honest living as a schoolmaster in Manchester.