---
id: MECW42-066
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 13, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 March 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 13 March 1865

Dear Engels,

There are mistakes in your financial statement, viz. you sent me £235 on *8 June,* £350 at the beginning of *July* (the letter enclosing the money isn't dated, but I can tell from a letter of 5 July which said it was about to be sent) and £200 on *9 November 1864;* on the other hand, the last *£40* itemised on the statement *you said would eventually follow* (in the enclosed letter dated 9 November) but you *never sent it.* I hope that you will be able to convince yourself of this on checking your books again, and if so, that you will send me the money by return of post, before I leave for the continent (with my NIECE)[2], which will probably be at the end of this week.177

With regard to *Schweitzer's brazenness,* I have decided on a different course. There are some things about which one would be glad to enlighten the public but can only do so *in response to direct provocation,* and then one must not miss the OPPORTUNE TIME OF A REPLY. And such is the case with Schweitzer's comments connected with the garbage from Blind.[3] I intend to reply in the *Düsseldorfer Zeitung* actually on behalf of *both of us,* but I shall sign in *my name* alone, as it would be *ludicrous to imply you shared responsibility for 'Achilles',*[4] and as I shall be quoting mainly *(exclusively,* if my plan works out) from Schweitzer's letters to me anyway.

My plan therefore is this: Schweitzer is reproducing, in print, the lies put out by the *Neue Frankfurter Zeitung,* knowing them to be lies. (Is the article in the form of an editorial in the paper, or what?) Viz.: 1. neither Lassalle's name nor any mention of Lassalle appeared in the prospectus we received 'printed as manuscript'. (Liebknecht had prevented that.) 2. In note of 30 December Schweitzer *most humbly* asks my pardon for so brazenly using passage from private letter of condolence, as both introduction and conclusion to his hymn of adulation. 3. By means of short extracts from Schweitzer's letters from 30 December 1864 to 15 February 1865 (his last letter), I shall show that the conflict over **tactics** was a lasting one from the *first,* trial number[5] right up until we announced our withdrawal,[6] and was by no means a quarrel suddenly picked, as man-of-honour Schweitzer pretends, with his support for Blind's shit. At the same time, this little mosaic of excerpts from Schweitzer's letters will show with what *servility* this selfsame brute behaved towards us, until he suddenly turned *vicious* on being kicked. This will make salutory reading for bourgeois and workers alike (and for Rüstow). All in all, good *introduction* for the break with 'Lassalleanism', which is in any case inevitable. (Of course, as far as student Blind is concerned, if that water-newt should ever COME OUT again, I shall always treat Lassalle as a dead lion set beside a live ass. It is indecent that such an 'uneducated' Baden publican should even presume to put himself on a level with a man who has studied Heraclitus and the Roman law of inheritance.)

Let me know by return if you approve of my plan, as I can't afford to lose any time.[7] (And don't forget to tell me in what form Blind's twaddle appeared in the *Neue Frankfurter Zeitung.*) In my opinion, it's necessary.

Although, unlike you, I don't have the pleasure of corresponding with the Too-Clever-By-Half,[8] nor of being able to foul his nest for him, nevertheless I've been infernally HARASSED just recently, quite apart from the furuncles, which won't go away; e.g., last night I didn't get to bed until 4 o'clock in the morning.

Besides my work on the book,[9] the *INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION* takes up an enormous amount of time, as I am IN FACT the HEAD of it. And what a waste of time! (And it would come just now, with the French business and the election business here, etc., all at the same time.) E.g. the French shit:

*28 February.* Tolain and Fribourg here from Paris. Meeting of the *CENTRAL COUNCIL,* where they state their case and bicker with Le Lubez until 12 o'clock at night. Then reconvene in Bolleter's tavern, where I had another 200 odd cards to sign. (I have now got them to change this stupid practice by having our handwriting engraved on the plate, and only the GENERAL SECRETARY[10] signs by hand. Meanwhile, the remaining 1,000 cards OF THE OLD EDITION had to be signed IN THE OLD STYLE.)

*1 March.* Polish MEETING.[11]

*4 March. SUBCOMMITTEE*[12] *meeting about the French question* until 1 o'clock in the morning.

*6 March. SUBCOMMITTEE meeting* about ditto until 1 o'clock in the morning.

*7 March. SITTING OF THE CENTRAL COUNCIL* until 12 o'clock at night. *Resolutions passed* *(I enclose resolutions,* along with the private instructions which the CENTRAL COUNCIL is sending to Schily, who, as you can see from resolution V, *has been appointed CENTRAL COUNCIL DELEGATE (AMBASSADOR) AT Paris.)* (This meeting of 7 March, in which Le Lubez was utterly *culbuté*,[13] was very embarrassing and stormy, and left the English in particular with the impression THAT THE FRENCHMEN STAND REALLY IN NEED OF A BONAPARTE!) In between times, people *dashing this way and that* to see me in connection with the conference with Bright which was held last Saturday (11 March), etc. Reported briefly on same to Jones (he had enquired beforehand about it on Friday), instructed him to convey the letter to you.[14]

WELL, *mon cher, que faire?*[15] He who says 'A' must also say 'B'. You will see from the enclosed *Nordstern* (SEE THE 2 FIRST LEADERS) that, despite his hatred for us, Bruhn immediately seized the opportunity to *attack* Schweitzer, out of sheer *professional jealousy.*[16] This is most important since Bruhn's paper is of longer standing, and this has at least sowed *dissension in the camp of these fellows themselves.* A short notice about your pamphlet will appear in Bender's *Anzeiger*[17] this week. I sent one to the *Hermann* (Juch), saying he should form his *own* opinion of it, etc.^a This he will do. I chose this approach because with Juch I'd always poked fun at the notices sent to the *Hermann* by Blind, for Blind and about Blind, and the two of us here are generally regarded as *one* person.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.