---
id: MECW42-284
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, November 10, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 November 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels and K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 10 November 1867

Dear Moor,

What touching gaucheness in dear old Kugelmann's letter! And what discernment of character in respect of that Warnebold! The fellow extracts all his secrets from him, and all the while he is a Prussian spy! You *must* tell Kugelmann the truth about that cur—at least sufficiently to stop the Prussians learning every detail of our activities.[1] The cur is abusing your confidences, which absolves you from any obligation toward him.

I saw Siebel yesterday in Liverpool. I fear the poor devil's days are numbered. Since I last saw him, his desease has advanced considerably, his health broke down in Barmen, he has had 3 successive attacks of pleurisy and is coughing very violently (he calls them coughing-spasms, and they recur periodically), however he has lately regained some of his health and strength at Honnef on the Rhine. Unfortunately, I could only speak to him alone for a short while, there were always several relatives there apart from his wife. Despite that, we settled the most important things.

*D'abord*:[2] Siebel has up to the present moment *neither received a copy*[3] *nor even seen one, although he wrote to Meissner* asking to be sent one by post immediately on publication. Mr Rittershaus, however, who has not lifted a finger, has received one, and Siebel thought you had not sent him one at all, but had done so to Rittershaus, which may have piqued him. I naturally explained the true position to him, but a few lines from you to him, which you can enclose in a letter to me, really are called for. But you must now take Meissner to task forthwith for this negligence. This affair has cost us 20 short notices which Siebel would immediately have had in all the papers, but could not because he did not have the book. Furthermore, I must have a copy here *by 22 November at the latest* to send to Siebel in Madeira, where he will make up for lost time as far as he can. But really what can one say to such a slapdash approach? And these are the Germans who are demanding self-government and CANNOT LOOK AFTER THEIR OWN BUSINESS!

Of the 3 articles I took with me, we sent off 2 to the *Frankfurter Börsenzeitung*[4] and to the *Düsseldorfer Zeitung*[5] forthwith—the latter will do Mr Heinrich Bürgers good, with his circumspect scruples: my article[6] —a very simple report, which makes no judgments and was composed for a *national-liberal* newspaper—is too dubious for that brute![7] Siebel took the 3rd with him, it will probably go to the *Barmer Zeitung.*[8] Notices will also appear in all kinds of illustrated and other papers, as soon as Siebel himself has the book. Furthermore, the *Weser-Zeitung* will receive an article *a tempo*[9] from him for its literary section, and one on the book, and will be faced only with the choice of taking both or neither. (Siebel is using the literary section articles as a bait for editors, they are desperate for them, and he often lets them pocket the fee themselves.) Other ideas will occur to him as soon as he has the book.

*Ad vocem*[10] Freiligrath: that worthy's debts amounted to approx. £6,000, £4,000 with the Swiss Bank advanced for shares in the Mansfield Co. which are now worthless, and the rest debts of honour. The *Comité*[11] has settled these debts at 5% dividend, a few of them at 10%. Freiligrath has thus gone bankrupt *in optima forma.*[12] The collection will amount to approx. 30,000 talers.

Freiligrath is said to have lied to the *Comité* through and through, concealed his debts and pretended his wife knew nothing of it and must not be allowed to know anything of it either, so that eventually they were very rude to him; even on the day when he knew that a letter was to arrive from London to say that the debts of honour totalled £2,000, he was still saying they were only £1,500, etc. In short, his conduct has been disgraceful and cowardly. I said I was quite convinced that dear old Ida[13] knew all about it, to which he replied: how was it then possible for her to give *fêtes*[14] last summer in Barmen? Just imagine, Ida goes a-begging and at the same time holds *fêtes* for the people she is begging from with the money that has not yet been given!

I am surprised Tussy[15] has not yet sent me a receipt for my contribution to the Freiligrath funeral-fund. THAT IS NOT BUSINESSLIKE.

Your

F. E.