---
id: MECW42-268
title: "Letter to Ludwig Kugelmann, October 12, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 October 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

Manchester, 12 October 1867

Dear Kugelmann,

Marx sent me your letter of the 8th,;[1] believing I would be better able to give you the right ideas for a review of his book^f than he could himself. To save trouble, I have just set out what are, in my opinion, the most suitable ideas for the *populus*[2] in two complete articles which will probably be appropriate for almost any bourgeois paper[3] they may, however, be of use to you until you have worked your way through the 50 sheets' yourself, for writing both long and short articles for other publications. The[4] main thing is not *what* and *how* but *that* the book be discussed, and that the Fauchers, Michaelis, Roschers and Raus are *forced* to express an opinion on it. In as many papers as possible, political and other, wherever it can be done. Long and short notices, provided they come thick and fast. We must make it impossible for these gentlemen to pursue their policy of total silence, which they would dearly love to try, and indeed *as quickly as possible.* Make sure you always send a copy of what is printed to Marx, so that we, and Meissner, too, are informed of events.

Liebknecht is giving a pretty good account of himself in the Berlin cattle-shed.[5] He is consistently voting *against everything* and also made a good maiden speech—immediately interrupted by Zeus Cronion Simson. And what's more, his motion[6] was the only sensible one.

I hope all has been well with you since my departure.[7] I have been back here for 2 months now, sitting at my office desk and frittering good time away with this lousy COMMERCE. You will have heard about our little Fenian *coup de main*[8] here. The affair was splendidly organised and executed; but the ringleaders were caught unfortunately.[9]

With best greetings.

Yours

F. Engels

Marx expressly asks that all the articles should be placed there immediately and that you should only send them to him *after* publication.[10]