---
id: MECW42-186
title: "Letter to Johann Philipp Becker, August 31, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "31 August 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 314; First published: in Marx and Engels, Works, Moscow, 1934."
status: raw
---

*To Johann Philipp Becker in Geneva*

**[London,] 31 August 1866**

Dear Becker,

It is absolutely imperative that *Jung* be made President of the congress,

1. because he speaks the 3 languages, English, French, and German.

2. Jung *truly represents* the **Central Council**, Odger (who furthermore only knows his mother-tongue) was *not* elected by the **Central Council**; we elected 4 delegates, with Jung at the head; Odger was only to go if he could raise the money himself (guaranteed by us, of course). He has done *nothing* for the Association.

3. Cremer and Odger have hatched a very mean plot to prevent Jung and Eccarius leaving on the very last day.

4. *Odger* wishes to be elected *President of the congress* as a means of impressing the English and imposing himself as President of the **Central Council** for next year, against the *wish of the great majority of the* **Council***.*

5. Cremer and Odger have both *betrayed us* in the Reform League, where they came to a *compromise with the bourgeoisie* against our wishes.

6. Mr Cremer has *morally debased* himself completely. All his efforts are now aimed at securing a '*paid' post* for himself, so that he need not work. *In no circumstances must* he therefore be elected *as General Secretary* by the congress. (The only paid post.) They must elect Fox, on the pretext, which is incidentally true, that the General Secretary must know *more than one language.*

9. The *President of the* **Central Council** must not be elected by *the* congress but here *in London,* as a figure of *merely local importance.*

10. At the election of the *President for the congress, you* must say at the outset that an *international congress* can only be presided over by a man who can speak the various languages, simply to save time, etc.

11. Convey this to Dupleix.

12. I should be glad if you would get Eccarius to translate the instructions which I wrote in the name of the **Central Committee** for the London delegates into German beforehand.

Regards and handshake.

Your
Karl Marx