---
id: MECW42-124
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, January 15, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "15 January 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p 218; First published: in Marx and Engels, Works, Moscow, 1946."
status: raw
---

*To Wilhelm Liebknecht in Leipzig*

**[London,] 15 January 1866**

Dear **Library**,

Happy New Year!

You must excuse my silence, ditto the brevity of these lines of mine. You will not believe **how bothered** I am for time. *Indisposition*, forever recurring periodically, all manner of unfortunate *mischances demands made on me* by the **International Association**, etc., have confiscated every free moment I have for writing out the fair copy of my manuscript. [*Capital*] I hope to be able to take Volume I of it to the publisher for printing myself in March. (The whole thing, the two volumes, will, however, appear *simultaneously* This *is good*.)

So, this very much by way of summary.

Today I am sending you by post the 2 latest issues of *The Workman's Advocate,* of which Eccarius is now editor. If, as I hope, you send any *articles* for it, please do so to me (political, social, as you will).

I also enclose **cards of membership** for you. I have paid for them. You can therefore give them to whomever you like, and have only to inscribe the name and after the £, put 0, but after the Os., 1d.

The conditions, **generally**, are these: *a society as such* that wishes to join has an *Association collective membership Card*, for which 5s. per year is to be paid. But, if all the members join individually, they have to take out cards of the kind I am sending you. This is advantageous for workers. The cards serve as a passport abroad, and their *confréres* in London, Paris, Brussels, Lyons, Geneva, etc., will get jobs for them.

The Association has made great progress. It already has 1 official English paper, *The Workman's Advocate,* a Brussels one, *La Tribune du Peuple,* a French one in Geneva, *Journal de 1'Association Internationale des Travailleurs, Section de la Suisse Romande*, and a German one in Geneva, *Der Vorbote,* which will be appearing in a few days. *Address: 6 rue du Môle, Genf, J. P. Becker,* in case you want to write to the old man occasionally (as I hope you will).

I am now hoping you will soon make it possible for me to announce the foundation of a Leipzig section and enable me to present correspondence. (*In English.* It can then be used in *The Workman's Advocate* as well.) The number is not important, although **the more, the better**.

If people want to join *en masse,* as a society, you will see that the *total price* of 5s., which they have to pay annually, is *nothing*.

J. P. Becker writes to me:

'Sections are going to be formed in Leipzig, Gotha, Stuttgart and Nuremberg; shall we register them here for the time being, until there is a large number and a Central Committee has been formed in Germany?'

I have replied *in the affirmative*. However, since there can be several branches in one town, you and your people can establish links direct with us.

I have had a second letter from the Berliners. I am at last writing to them today. Ditto to Dr Kugelmann.

*Salut*.

Your
K. M.

I will let you know next time what questions are to be dealt with at the Geneva Congress at the end of May.