---
id: MECW42-204
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 17, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "17 December 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p 338;. First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 17 December 1866**

**Dear Fred**,

**Thanks for the £10**.

As far as Rode is concerned, he is obsessed with political connections and his own self-importance. As you are finding this obsession a nuisance — and **justly so — you** should write to him at the first opportunity saying that you have not the honour of his acquaintance and requesting him to desist from such **liberties**.

The *Revue des deux Mondes* and the *Revue Contemporaine* had two detailed articles on the '**International',** which treat it and its congress as one of the most significant events of the century. The like also in *The Fortnightly Review,* in consequence. Meanwhile, we are in practice paralysed **by want of funds** and even **of men**, with all the English being totally absorbed by the **Reform Movement**. The French government is (*heureusement*) beginning to treat us as enemies. One of our more dubious **acquisitions** was the joining (**at** New York) of **Head Centre** Stephens.

Was not the Pope's address to the French **officers** capital? Only an Italian priest could thus, before the whole of Europe, deliver Bonaparte a kick in the form of a **blessing**.

It is highly characteristic of the *status rerum* that neither Bonaparte nor William the Conqueror are quite right in the top **department**. The latter believes that God Almighty has entrusted him with a special mission, and the former has been **turned so topsy-turvy** by Mexico and Bismarck that he sometimes appears positively demented.

And do you not think that there will be peace for another year yet at least (apart from **accidents**, of course, such as the death of Bonaparte, etc.)? The fellows all need time for the **conversion** and **production of arms**, do they not?

Not a word from Mr *Meissner* yet. I presume that now, at the year's end, he finds the pressure of business very great. The contract does give me surety in the event of any evasive manoeuvres. In the second, emended and *definitive* version, the contract contains **no stipulation whatever as to the term for which the manuscript** [of the first volume of Capital] **is to be ready**. But if there is no answer by tomorrow, I shall write again.

As you enjoy credit with *quelconque* bookseller and I **can** not **spend** a **farthing** on books at the moment, you would be doing me a great favour if you could *get as quickly as possible* for me: '*J. E. Th. Rogers: A History of Agriculture*'. I must have a look at the book and have left a gap in one chapter for the purpose. Although it has already been out for a long time, it is not yet in the library. Nor at Mudie's, so I am assured by Eccarius, for whom *The Commonwealth* took out a subscription there.

*Salut.*

Your
K. M.