---
id: MECW42-031
title: "Letter to Jenny Marx Longuet, January 11, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "11 January 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Voinstvuyushchy materialist,* Book 4, 1925, and in the language of the original, English, in *The Socialist Review* (London), No. 44, September 1929 Published in Engli"
status: raw
---

MARX TO HIS DAUGHTER JENNY

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 January 1865
58 Dover Street

My sweet child,

I wanted to leave Manchester tomorrow, but I'll be hardly able to do so before Sunday (15th Jan.) next.^S4 Ernest Jones, whom I am anxious to speak, is busily engaged in the neighbouring towns and has invited me (and Engels) for next *Friday* evening when he'll be at home. I have not yet seen him, and could not see him before that day. This is one cause of delay. There are others, but at all events I shall not stay longer than until Sunday.

The German translation of the 'Address to the Working Classes'^a has been reprinted in the *Mainzer Zeitung,* the 'Address to Lincoln'^b in the *Berliner Reform* and the London *Hermann.* The latter honour is probably due to Mr Juch's anxiety lest his rival Bender might monopolize 'our protection'.

The weather here was abominable. Today 'the sun shines', as Müller has it, but its rays are reflected by the ice drops covering the dirty streets. Even the sunbeams must here always have something disagreeable to fall upon.

I have not yet seen a Borchardt, and as to the Gumperts, I had only a few minutes' conversation with the Dr yesterday evening.

On my arrival I did not find Frederick, but in his stead a letter informing me that he would be back from fox-hunting at 6 o'clock. Meanwhile he had taken all precautionary measures for making my **entrée joyeuse"'*[1] (with your great historical knowledge you'll not be at a loss as to the ****entrée joyeuse').* Whether his change of domicile is an improvement, seems a rather debatable question. At all events, the people are less impudent.

Apropos. There is much **chronique scandaleuse** just now in the Freiligrath world, as far as it is connected with the General Bank of Switzerland. There has appeared a pamphlet at Genève, disclosing the scandalous mismanagement of Fazy,[2] Freiligrath's 'natural superior'. He has been forced to resign his post as supreme director of the bank, and **um zu retten, was zu retten ist**[3] (literally this) Jew *Reinach* has been put into his place, assisted by a Frenchman and—*Karl Vogt* who has the despicable meanness of betraying, and denouncing, and publicly declaring against Fazy, his old idol, the man in fact of whom he is a mere 'creature'.

I suppose you are aware that the first **abonnement number** of the 'Social-Democrat' has been *confiscated* by the police at Berlin.[4] This is a rather favourable accident. Those fellows stand in need of some small political martyrdom.

I hope all is right at home. The cat being gone, the mice ought to dance. Pay my compliments to Ma, 'Success', 'Mine Own' and the 'Prophet'.[5] As to yourself, my dear Aaron, I dreamt of you last night, and saw you in your bloomer costume, performing the most wonderful jumps, almost flying through the air, after you had before done the Davenport trick in the most admirable manner.[6]

I felt quite proud and chuckled in my sleeves over the success of my old acquaintance, and had the most lively remembrance of the rather unplastic dance you had in bygone times executed before the golden calf, in the desert.[7]

Show Ma the inclosed. She will remember Bochum-Dolfs, from Paris. He is now the happy father of 10 children with whom he 'vagabonds' through the world.