---
id: MECW42-323
title: "Letter to Ludwig Kugelmann, January 30, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "30 January 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "Source: Karl Marx, Letters to Dr Kugelmann (Martin Lawrence, London, undated).  Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

Dear Kugelmann

Cut, lanced, etc, in short treated in every respect *secundum legem artis*.[1] In spite of that the thing is continually breaking out again so that, with the exception of two or three days, I have been lying quite fallow for eight weeks. Last Saturday I went out again for the first time – Monday another relapse. I hope that it will finish this week, but who will guarantee me against new eruptions? It is extremely disagreeable. Moreover it attacks my head. My friend, Dr Gumpert[2] in Manchester, urges me to use arsenic. What do you think of it?

Your Koppel is not yet here.

Kertbeny[3] is a German-Hungarian whose real name, between ourselves, is Benkert. The German-Hungarians love to Magyarise their names. I do not know him personally. Since he had a quarrel with Vogt[4] about 1860, I asked him for some notes but received nothing of any use. (My Hungarian material was obtained partly from Szemere,[5] partly from my own experience in London.) Later he applied to me in a quarrel he had with Kossuth.[6] As far as I have been able to learn, there is nothing politically suspicious against him. He seems to be a literary busybody. His heresies with regard to Bonaparte are held by many otherwise honest eastern barbarians – in any case watch him. I also consider it more diplomatic not to show any mistrust of him (and for that reason I am enclosing the biographical notice[7] which he requested). Nevertheless, as soon as the writing position no longer troubles me, I shall 'order' information about him from other sources.

You guessed rightly about *Plagiarismus*.[8] I was intentionally uncivil and hair-raising in order to make Hofstetten[9] suspect Liebknecht and to conceal my authorship. This between ourselves. You probably know that Engels and Siebel[10] have got articles about my book published in the *Barmen-Zeitung*, *Elberfelder Zeitung*, *Frankfurt Börsen-Zeitung *and – to the great grief of Heinrich Bürgers – in the *Düsseldorf-Zeitung*.[11] Siebel was the man in Barmen whose acquaintance I wanted you to make. He is now in Madeira for his health.

Last week the *Saturday Review *– the 'blood and culture' paper – had a notice about my book in a review of recent German books. I have come off pretty well, as you will see from the following passage:

The author's views may be as pernicious as we conceive them to be, but there can be no question as to the plausibility of his logic, the vigour of his rhetoric, and the charm with which he invests the driest problems of political economy.

Ouff!

My best greetings to your dear wife and Fränzchen. You will get other photographs from here, for we have now discovered that the water colours which looked good the first day dissolved in patches immediately after.

Write to me as often as your time permits. During my illness and the many occasions for vexation, letters from friends are very welcome.

Salut

Yours

**KM**