---
id: MECW42-087
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, June 24, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 June 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BERLIN

[London,] 24 June 1865

Dear Liebknecht,

You must explain to yourself my long silence by continuing indisposition and much work in intervals when I have been capable of it. Your letters, moreover, contained nothing which would have required urgent reply.

T h e *Nordstern* has most likely been suspended for a while owing to lack of money? At least, it has not arrived here for a couple of weeks. A fine gutter rag, to be sure! T h e declaration by various associations,[1] that anyone who so much as lays a finger on the articles of faith as revealed by Lassalle is guilty of high treason, is priceless. *Haut-goût*[2] INDEED! What is Mr B. Becker doing in Berlin, and how is the *Social-Demokrat* 'surviving'? You have quite the wrong notion of Dr Kugelmann. I have been in correspondence with him for years past. He was a socialist back in 1848, in Düsseldorf. As TO Pieper, the VERY NAME OF Kugelmann was not known to him when he was here.[3]

I have not yet written to Stumpf because I have not been writing any letters over this period. As regards the letter he entrusted to Bruhn, I have not, of course, ever set eyes upon it.[4]

T h e INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION is making great strides *despite* the 'ENORMOUS SUPPORT' it is receiving from Germany. 2 2 0

As regards the 'Louis Bonaparte',[5] I could see from your DROPPING OF THE SUBJECT that the matter has come to nothing. 7 9 I am RATHER glad of this, as I shall later be having it re-printed in the essay-collection all the same.

What is old Hatzfeldt doing? A n d the fracas over the will?[6]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

What are Messrs E. Bauer, Bucher *et* Co. up to? Edgar[7] will probably be staying here a while longer yet.[8]