---
id: MECW42-290
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 28, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "28 November 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 478; First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**Dear Fred***,*

I see that I did not enclose the 2 letters from Borkheim for you. But it is not really necessary. Yesterday we had the 'discussion' he desired. He has reverted to the idea (which I suggested to him 2 months ago) of a loan from the 'Atlas' Life Assurance Company, whose secretary is a friend of his. I completed the papers yesterday at his house. You only figure as a **reference** on them. £150 (of which Borkheim would receive £45), repayable on 1 September.

I no longer have any faith in the success of Borkheim's operations. *I have no doubt about his good will.*

Have you received his '*Pearl*'? (French and German so far).

Important letter from Schily enclosed. Please send it back *by return;* give your opinion at the same time. Whatever happens I shall not permit Moses to derive 'profit' from my work without profiting to some extent from it myself.

I am having to be diplomatic about Fenianism. I cannot keep entirely silent, but under no circumstances do I want the fellows, when criticising my book [Capital], to confine themselves to the statement that I am a demagogue.

I am *sending* you Borkheim's *Gentz* (important for the article on Russia) without his knowledge. Please return it to me as soon as you have finished.

I now have a rash of furuncles more or less all over, and am glad of it. It puts paid to the carbuncle malady.

*Salut.*

Your
Moro