---
id: MECW42-174
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 21, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 July 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1923 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 21 July[1] 1866

DEAR FRED, The carbuncle has fortunately departed again of its own accord. But in the present heat my LIVER has been and still is scourging me sorely. For all that, my work[2] is progressing well and will continue to do so if my present condition lasts. It is, of course, embarrassing for me to have to pester you again already, but as you will gather from the enclosed note (which you must return to me) there is *periculum in mora.*[3] I have with difficulty obtained an extension until next Tuesday. From your last communication I am in doubt as to whether you are in Manchester. Nor have I received any more copies of *The Manchester Guardian.* Or has nothing else of yours appeared in it?[4]

One must refrain from passing any judgment on the present circumstances, pending news either of a ceasefire or of a decisive battle at Vienna. At any rate, the course of events has demonstrated the extraordinary decay of the Austrian system.

For the moment, these English of ours are, as always, paying homage to success. The great Arnold Ruge, too, has made his *pronunciamento* for Prussia 14 days ago, as the great Kinkel did earlier still. If the Prussians continue victorious to the end, what a throng of place-seekers and fatherland-rescuers will surge towards Frankfurt!

At all events, the '*homme prestige',*'[5]Jupiter Scapin',[6] GROTESQUE PROVIDENCE OF EUROPE is shaken and even overshadowed by Bismarck. That is some consolation.

The VTH REPORT of the CHILDREN'S EMPLOYMENT COMMISSION appeared here a few days ago. It concludes the *enquête*[7] into the manufactories, and only a supplement has yet to appear concerning the 'ORGANISED GANGS' of women and children, who are sporadically used in agriculture. There could have been no more dreadful blow to the optimism of the bourgeoisie since 1850 than from these 5 BLUE BOOKS. Furthermore, the VIIIth REPORT of the BOARD OF HEALTH[8] was brought out a few days ago, which contains in particular a very detailed *enquête* of the living conditions of the proletariat.[9]

*Salut*

Your

K. M.