---
id: MECW42-234
title: "Letter to Ludwig Kugelmann, July 13, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 July 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 395; First published: slightly abridged in *Die Neue Zeit*, 1901-1902 and in full in Pisma Marksa k Kugelmanu (Letters of Marx to Kugelmann), Moscow-"
status: raw
---

*To Ludwig Kugelmann in Hanover*

Dear Friend,

**Thanks for Hegel and** the young madam!

I shall now briefly answer all the points you raised.

*Engels* is in Denmark at present and will be paying you a visit one day in the course of this month. Ad *vocem the same:* you recall you told me that Menke (or whatever the man in your *statistical* office in Hanover is called) made some very appreciative remarks about the work of mine [Critique of Political Economy] that was published by Duncker. For Engels' ears I have *twisted* this, to the effect that Menke expressed his great appreciation to me of Engels' 'Condition of the Working Class'. *The reason for this pia fraus* (and I have perpetrated various *fraudes* with the same object in view): to *spur* Engels *on* to write and publish the second volume, concerning the period from 1845 to the present. I have at last *succeeded* in this to the extent that he has promised to get down to it. So, if *by chance* conversation should turn to the statistician, do *not let the cat out of the bag.*

Nothing is fixed for *my wife's journey*, nor can it be, it having been overtaken by another event, the proposed departure of my 3 daughters for Bordeaux, to visit Lafargue senior.

I do not advise you to go to Paris. It is impossible to study anything in the midst of that Babylon of things and among that throng of people, unless one stays there for at least 6 weeks, which is *very expensive.*

My book [*Capital*] comprises **about** 50 sheets. You see how I had miscalculated **as to its extent**. A few days ago I sent the Appendix, entitled *The Form of Value, Appendix to Chapter I, I*, to Leipzig. You know who was the *author of this plan*, and I herewith offer him my thanks for his **suggestion**.

You will excuse me if I terminate these lines here. Another proof-sheet has just come.

With my best compliments to your wife and the young madam.

Yours
K. Marx

With my next letter I shall send *membership cards* for **Mrs** Kugelmann and **Mrs** Tenge. One lady, **Mrs** Law, has been promoted to membership of our Central Council.

Best thanks from Eleanor for the **stamps**. The photograms will follow.