---
id: MECW42-308
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, December 16, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 December 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 16 December 1867

Dear Moor,

Enclosed a letter from Liebknecht, who is another great muddle-head. Especially over the Austrian business. Because Austria stands on the *eve* of its 1789, Liebknecht *therefore* praises it as the state of freedom![1] I have not answered him yet, but will do so as soon as you send the letter back.

Have sent articles to Kugelmann 1. for the Swabian Mayer,[2] 2. for the *Gewerbeblatt*[3] Ditto to Siebel for Mannheim.[4] Further Swabian articles to follow.

The piece[5] has appeared in the *Zukunft.* I now buy the paper SECOND HAND from the Schiller Institute[6] so that I can see it regularly.

In haste.

Your

F. E.

The marriage business is perfectly straightforward. THE MARRIAGE IS PERFORMED BEFORE THE REGISTRAR FOR THE DISTRICT, who also puts up the BANNS at his OFFICE 14 days previously. Two or more witnesses are necessary. You can find out all the details at that office. *For England* nothing else is required, but as regards validity in France, Jones cannot tell you either, so Lafargue senior will have to ask *his lawyer in Bordeaux.* I shall, incidentally, check the *code civil.*

Gumpert was married in this way. Your wife can tell her philistine neighbours that this way was chosen because Laura is protestant and Paul catholic.