---
id: MECW42-101
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, September 20, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "20 September 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published in the language of the original, English, in *Wilhelm Liebknecht. Briefwechsel mit Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels,* The Hague, 1963 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works,"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

[London,] 20 September 1865

Dear Miller,[1]

I received yours yesterday afternoon, too late to post a letter here. *Illness* had much to do with my protracted silence. There were other reasons which I think useless now to dwell upon. Much business pressing upon my time just now, I can only return these few lines.

A *Report*[2] (English, of course) on your part is very important. It must be here on Monday next (25 September). It cannot arrive timely unless you send me the letter *directly* by the Leipzig post.

The Swiss have chosen two delegates, Mons Dupleix, a Frenchman, and Mr *Philipp Becker,* a German.

Old Hatzfeldt dwells at Paris, where the old hag is intriguing with the 'horn-bearing' father of 'Socialism', *Moses,*[3] her most cringing slave. It was at her instigation, that he inserted his 'warning' in the *Nordstern* and his slander into the *Social-Demokrat.*^2iS She is now concocting with him the 'Apotheosis' of her own belated 'Oedipus'.[4] The London correspondent of the *Social-Demokrat* seems to be cracked Weber.[5] All these things have been reported to me from Paris. As to myself, I carefully abstain from taking any notice whatever of what is going on in the Berlin and Hamburg 'organs' of the movement.^0 This so-called movement is so disgusting a thing that the less you hear of it the better.

We have founded here a *weekly* paper of our own *The Workman's Advocate.* You will oblige by sending correspondence (English) for it to my address.

Yours truly

A. Williams[6]