---
id: MECW42-154
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, April 6, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 April 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 and in the language of the original, English, in: *Wilhelm Liebknecht. Briefwechsel mit Karl Marx und Fried"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

Margate, 6 April 1866

5 Lansell's Place

My dear Miller,[1]

You see from the address that I have been banished to the seaside by my medical adviser.[2]

After having received your last letter, and some letters on the part of our Berlin friends,[3] my sickness assumed a really dangerous character. For some time it was very doubtful whether or not that decomposition of the blood, under which I labour, should get the better of me. It was only towards the middle of March that I was bodily enabled to remove myself to this place. I am now restored, and shall very soon return to London. But again a quarter of a year has been lost!

Write me immediately under my London address. After my return, I shall regularly send you *The Commonwealth* (under which altered title *The Workman's Advocate* is now published).[4] It is only since a few weeks that it has been registered for Transmission for abroad. Eccarius is no longer the editor, but only a contributor. It was to be foreseen, that so soon as the paper should get some sort of standing, a Foreigner would not be allowed to retain the nominal leadership!

Write me

1) about the state of 'our' movement in Germany, 2) about the state of German politics.

Yours truly

K. M. My best compliments to Madame.[5]