---
id: MECW42-275
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, October 19, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "19 October 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

London, 19 October 1867

DEAR FRED,

As regards *Borkheim,* I told him: what Engels wrote is final and is not subject to '*negotiation'.* He (today he left for Bordeaux) let himself be ruled by me to the extent of paying out £40 to me and promising TO FIND THE REST by 10 November without
further prevarication if you were *unable,* etc. But as a businessman and a Jew he had to make just one more attempt!

Incidentally, Borkheim has just had a hugely gratifying experi- ence. Schabelitz put an exceedingly bombastic notice of Bor- kheim's **Perle"'**[2] * in the *Buchhändlerbörsenblatt[3] * in which Borkheim is featured as Peter the Hermit *vis-à-vis Russia* WELL! The *Moscow Newspaper*[4] has *printed* this (in translation) as a curiosity, and he thus had the pleasure of seeing himself and his name in print *in Russian]* He showed me a copy and interpreted it for me.*

Lafargue was put to a deal of trouble translating Borkheim's French at least passably into French.[5] I had to give him some assistance, of course, especially for the quotations from Kant, Fichte and Hegel, which Borkheim probably did not quite understand even in German. But he has these gentlemen in his library.

I am glad the matter is thus SETTLED. In recent weeks I have found it perfectly impossible to write for more than maybe 2 hours. Apart from the incursions FROM WITHOUT, there are all the aggravations of home life, which I always find especially nerve- racking. I have been suffering from insomnia again and had the pleasure of seeing 2 small carbuncles blossom near the *membrum.* Fortunately, they have faded away. My sickness always originates in the mind. While on the subject of the *membrum,* may I commend the following lines to you *for Moore* from the French satirist of the 16th century, *Mathurin Régnier.* Well-read though I am in this field, I do not think that *chaude pisse* has ever been more poetically described:

Mon cas, qui se lève et se hausse,
Bave d'une estrange façon;
Belle, vous fournîtes la sausse,
Lors que je fournis le poisson.

Las! si ce membre eut l'arrogance
De fouiller trop les lieux sacrés,
Qu'on lui pardonne son offence,
Car il pleure assez ses péchés.[6]

And this by the same poet is not bad either:

*Fluxion D'Amour*

L'amour est une affection
Qui, par les yeux, dans le cœur entre,
Et, par la forme de fluxion,
S'écoule par le bas du ventre.[7]

Finally:

*Lizette tuée par Régnier*

Lizette, à qui l'on faisait tort,
Vint à Régnier tout éplorée,
Je te pry: Donne-moi la mort,
Que j'ai tant de fois désirée!
Lui, ne la refusant en rien,
Tire son... vous m'entendez bien;
Et dedans le ventre la frappe.
Elle, voulant finir ses jours,
Lui dit: Mon cœur, pousse toujours,
De crainte que je n'en réchappe.
Régnier, las de la servir,
Craignant une seconde plainte,
Lui dit: Hastez-vous de mourir,
Car mon poignard n'a plus de pointe.[8]

2 Freiligrath snippets enclosed.[9]

Enclosed *2 Courrier français* and *1 Liberté.* There is no need for you to send back these journals. But do keep them! I have not read the nonsense in the *Courrier* on the *Art Militaire,* but I did read Proudhon on the *generatio aequivoca.[10]* I suspect that *l'un vaut l'autre.[11]*

H. Meyer was here the day before yesterday *en route* for America. Perhaps he called on you, too.

Let me have your recipes[12] for the German newspapers. I will have them copied out and find the most suitable PLACEMENTS. They will even find *double emploi*[13] at least in part, as Meyer was also asking for something of the kind for over there and will put them to good use. As soon as this has been done in Germany—*and that is the most important thing,* for success *here* depends largely on what happens there—you must write a critique for *The Fortnightly Review.*[14] * Beesly will get it in. This is a necessary prerequisite TO CATCH A PUBLISHER IN LONDON. The paper is secretly (so secretly that not a soul notices it) of Comteist persuasion, but wishes to provide an outlet for *every* point of view. If your critique arouses Mr Lewes' (the Goethe man, and unfortunately semi-Comteist, too) interest in the book (Lewes is secretly also CO-PROPRIETOR of the *Review),* it will be easy to find a publisher. And even without that, a publisher will in any case be easier to find then. The latest number contains a truly pitiful article by Thornton, in which he reproduces MALTHUSIANISM (in which the real MONGERS do *not* believe) in the most commonplace and trivial form.[15] *

What our party lacks is money, as the enclosed letters from Eccarius and Becker once more painfully demonstrate..[16] But for this deficiency, we should always be, despite great and irreplace- able losses, today as in 1848, *les plus forts[17]*

Regards to MRS Lizzy.[18]

Your

K. M.