---
id: MECW42-113
title: "Letter to Hermann Jung, November 20, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "20 November 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 200; First published: in Marx and Engels, Works, Moscow, 1934."
status: raw
---

*To Hermann Jung in London*

**[London,] 20 November 1865**

**The following are the questions**:

I. *Questions relating to the Association*

1) Questions relating to its organisation.*

2) The establishment of friendly societies for the members of the Association. — Moral and material support to be given to the Association's orphans.

II. ** Social Questions**

1) Co-operative labour.

2) Reduction of the hours of labour.

3) Female and children's labour.

4) * *Trades Unions.** Their past, their present, and their future.

5) Combination of efforts, by means of the International Association, in the struggle between capital and labour.

6) *International Credit* foundation of international credit institutions, their form and their mode of operation.

7) *Direct and Indirect Taxation.*

8) Standing armies and their effects upon production.

III. **International Politics**

The need to eliminate Muscovite influence in Europe by applying the right of self-determination of nations, and the re-establishment of Poland upon a democratic and social basis.

IV. *A Question of Philosophy*

The religious idea and its relation to social, political, and intellectual development.

Don't forget to ask for an *official* report on Vésinier.

Send me the *address* of *Kaub* which I have mislaid.

Yours fraternally*

K. Marx