---
id: MECW42-173
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 12, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 July 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 12 July 1866

Dear Moor,

I have written about your history to Gumpert, who is in Wales; as I do not know his address, the letter will first have to go to his home here, hence certainly some delay. As soon as I have a reply, I'll write to you, but meanwhile I should advise you to take arsenic *at once* and put off everything else, so as to stop the damned carbuncle. Put an end to *this* abomination at any cost.

Bonaparte's little plan and his intervention are in part probably a consequence of an earlier agreement with Bismarck, but certainly also—the new Confederation of the Rhine, etc.—are threats in his direction. But how the fellow can be so stupid as to make *this* plan public is beyond my comprehension:[1] as with Schapper—that he could be *so* stupid, etc.— It will assuredly drive the whole of South Germany into the arms of the Prussians and even the old philistines at the Exchange here are quite beside

themselves about it. One old man from Frankfurt told me: it's worth more to the Prussians than a reinforcement of 100,000 men.

You see how the stupid South Germans are letting themselves be picked off one by one without even taking the trouble to close ranks.[2] It'll soon be the old, old story, we've been betrayed, we'll be led like lambs to the slaughter![3] 1849 all over again. I feel sorry for the fellows, they're good soldiers. Only now does one understand how the French were able to score such successes against the 'Empire', but *not* how the Empire was able to hold out for so long against a concentrated monarchy like France.[4]

I will try and produce the stuff about the mass-murder-industry for you.[5]

Many regards.

Your

F. E.