---
id: MECW42-319
title: "Letter to Ludwig Kugelmann, January 11, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "11 January 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "Source: Karl Marx, Letters to Dr Kugelmann (Martin Lawrence, London, undated).  Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

Dear Kugelmann

*D*'*abord*[1] my best happy new years to your wife, Fränzchen and yourself. And then my best thanks for the Jupiter and for the interest you display in doing propaganda and fooling the German press. As our friend Weerth,[2] too early dead, used to sing:

Es gibt nichts schöneres auf der Welt
Als seine Feinde zu beissen,
Als über alle die plumpen Gesellen
Seine schlechte Witze zu reissen![3]

With all due respect to your medical authority, you have too low an opinion of the English, German and French doctors, whom I have consulted and still consult here, if you think that they cannot distinguish anthrax (carbuncles) from furuncles, particularly here in England – the land of carbuncles, which is actually a proletarian illness.

And even if the doctors could not distinguish between the two, the patient who knows both sorts of horrors, as I do, could do so; for the subjective impression they make is quite different, although, as far as I know, no doctor has as yet succeeded in making an exact theoretical diagnosis of the two. It is only in the last few years that I have been persecuted with the thing. Before that it was a complete stranger to me.

At the moment of writing to you I am not quite better and not yet able to work. Again several weeks lost and not even *pour le roi de Prusse!*[4]

The thing that appears most clearly in Herr Dühring's criticism[5] is – fear. I should be very glad if you could get for me Dühring's book *Gegen die Verkleinerer Carey*'s[6] and von Thünen's *Der isolierte Staat mit Bezug auf die Landwirtschaft*[7] or something like that (together with a note of the price). Such orders from here take too long.

Finally I would ask you to be good enough to send me about 12 copies of my photograph (only the full-faced one). About a dozen friends are plaguing me for them.

Enclosed, for Mrs Kugelmann, the photographs of my eldest daughter Jenny and of Eleanor, who sends her best greetings to Fränzchen.

*Ad vocem Liebknecht:* Let him play *le petit grand homme*.[8] for a little while. All that will turn out for the best in the best of all possible worlds.

I had all sorts of personal anecdotes to relate, but shall save them for the next time, when the writing position no longer troubles me.

Salut
Yours
**K Marx**

One of my friends here, who dabbles a lot in phrenology, said yesterday when looking at the photograph of your wife: A great deal of wit! So you see, phrenology is not the baseless art which Hegel imagined.