---
id: MECW42-342
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 19, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "19 March 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA*, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 19 March 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed £40 in two twenties, which, it is to be hoped, will suffice at least for the most urgent purposes. I had not expected that Löhrchen[1] would be making a honeymoon trip to America. So the wedding is on 8 April, a Wednesday; had it been Friday, Saturday or Monday I could have got away easily.

The things from old Maurer are very nice;[2] it is really remarkable how much material already exists on these subjects, and how little the professors have been able to make of it.

I shall try to discover the Anglo-Saxon word, but, since no Anglo-Saxon dictionary is available to me here, I shall have to make do with other sources, which are very dubious, in view of the large and peculiar stock of words in Anglo-Saxon. First of all, the correct spelling must be determined. With regard to *Wiffa,* a question: where is it found, so we might know whether it has Low German or High German sound shifts. If it is High German you should compare Graff's *Althochdeutscher Sprachschatz,* the *Bayerisches Wörterbuch* by Schindler or the Swiss dictionary by Stalder. Does it not occur in Grimm's *Rechtsalterthümer?*[3]

[4][5]

The accursed business with the ill-fated Schiller Institute here,[6] which Gumpert once pushed me into and then did nothing further, is finally reaching a crisis, and the matter will be decided by Wednesday. During these days I must—*étant engagé*[7] —make a great effort; I shall therefore scarcely be left with time in this period to write the English article.[8] From the middle of next week onwards I shall have peace, and will press ahead without pause. Regarding this business here, there is every prospect that I—and everything depends upon me—shall bring everything to a happy conclusion despite Borchardt and various other German cliques. Since I have been involved in the business for 4 years, and victory or defeat fall on my head, I simply *must.*

Since you say nothing about carbuncles, I assume that everything is fading without further issue.

The most conscientious reader of your book[9] here is Sam Moore; he has really worked his way thoroughly through over 600 pages and is grinding indefatigably on.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

So, Plon-Plon, according to *The Times*,[10] should inaugurate the Russian-Prussian-French alliance. This Bonaparte seems to get into a worse position every day. The stupid Prussians are continually making arrests and searching houses in the annexed lands.[11] The proofs[12] and the Dühring[13] will be dispatched today or tomorrow.