---
id: MECW42-226
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, June 3, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "3 June 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 JUNE 1867

DEAR FRED,

T h e reason why sheets 10 and 11 are not being sent to you, indeed why no more proofs[1] at all, you will discover from the enclosed note from Wigand. On the other hand, you will receive the first 5 pulls that have been sent to me. You can keep them ABOUT 8-10 days, but then you must let me know exactly *which points* in the exposition of the *form of value* you think should be specially popularised for the philistines in the supplement.[2]

Fenians ordered. 4 3 9 Other commissions will be executed BY AND BY. See the *Hermann* of last week. It is now the private herald of Mr Freiligrath, who is reporting on the PROGRESS OE THE SUBSCRIFHON here each week via Juch.[3] Little Jenny says that if her father ever did such a thing, she would publicly proclaim him her non-father. Whereupon Lafargue asked her: *Mais qu'est-ce que votre mère dirait là-dessus?*[4] T h e noble poet[5] is incidentally sly enough to declare already that he will *have* to remain in London on account of his resp. part in the Shakespeare translation. Ferdinand and Ida,[6] Ida and Ferdinand, A WELL-ASSORTED COUPLE, THOSE TWO!

Apropos. When Gumpert asked me which hospital Lafargue was at, I said St Thomas's. I was, however, mistaken. He is at *Bartholomew's* Hospital and asks for the ERROR to be corrected. Please do not forget to supply a photogramm of yourself and Lupus.

MY BEST COMPLIMENTS TO MRS Lizzy,[7] Moore and Chlormayer.[8]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

I was exceedingly pleased to read in the Paris correspondence of *The Times* that the Parisians chanted their support for the Poles to Alexander's *face,* etc.[9] Mr Proudhon and his little doctrinaire clique are not the FRENCH PEOPLE.