---
id: MECW42-266
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, October 11, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 October 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 October 1867

Dear Moor,

Kindest thanks for the letters and newspapers, which I shall send back in a few days.

I am writing to Borkheim that I will gladly take on the guarantee with him, provided he can so arrange the matter that everything proceeds secretly and that, e.g., no references are required of me—as I am contractually forbidden to become SURETY, and my relations with Monsieur Gottfried[1] are such that he would seize upon *any* occasion TO PUT ME IN THE WRONG BEFORE A COURT OF ARBITRATION. So long as he cannot do that, I am prepared to give him my solemn assurance that I will be co-liable for the £100, and await further proposals. Or would Freiligrath, e.g., be sufficient reference for me? The point is that the business would have to be concluded entirely behind the backs of all my commercial connections. *Enfin nous verrons.*[2]

Tomorrow afternoon I shall put something together for Kugelmann; if we are to wait until *he* has read the book through, we shall not get far. I shall write to Siebel, too. I do not know what you have in mind with the Freiligrath-bard Rittershaus, / do not know the fellow at all, and as far as I know, he is definitely not one of our people.

There was much else about which I wished to write to you, but then along comes that damned old Jew Leibel Choras, whom you know, and detains me for over an hour. Then another fellow immediately following. For a week now I have been overrun with clients, 2 more this morning. Yet another expected tomorrow morning. On top of that, endless bother with Gottfried, it is enough to drive one mad.

So till tomorrow.

Your

F. E.