---
id: MECW42-165
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, May 25, 1866"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 May 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1919 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx and Engels, *Selected Cor"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 25 May 1866 Mornington Street

Dear Moor,

The PANIC has, at all events, come much too soon and may possibly spoil a good solid crisis for us which would otherwise have occurred in 1867 or 1868. If we had not simultaneously chanced to have the big fall in cotton, we would barely have been affected by it here. The collapse of the LIMITED LIABILITY and FINANCING swindles had after all been long foreseen and hardly affected our TRADE at all. But the colossal losses on cotton which occurred simultaneously threaten to make it a grave matter here, so many houses here and in Liverpool are entangled in it through their branches in Bombay, etc., and as it occurred at the same time as the MONEY PANIC and the 10% bank-rate, it may be very grave for those who are holding much cotton. Here at least the business is far from over yet.

If the Austrians are canny enough not to attack, that will surely put the cat among the pigeons in the Prussian army. The fellows have never been as rebellious as they are in the present mobilisation. Unfortunately, one only learns the tiniest part of what is happening, but even that is enough to prove that a war of attack is impossible with this army. Once these lads are concen- trated in large numbers, and begin to count themselves and discover that 3/4 of the army is of one mind, and if they then have to hang around under arms for 3-4 weeks during the congress, things will inevitably lead to a crisis, and one fine morning obedience will be refused. Something is bound to spark it off; and with an army like that, once *one* battalion starts, it will spread like wildfire. But even if an open outbreak were to be avoided, it is certain that *this* army, with its MORALE as it is, and commanded by the old William, with Frederick Charles and the Crown Prince[1] under him commanding the wings, would at once be beaten beyond salvation by the furious Austrians under Benedek, who will have none of the Archdukes, nor any interference in the appointment of his staff, and has 300-360,000 men under him. The old jackass[2] knows that, too, and I am convinced that he will withdraw as soon as ever he can, precisely because of the mood in his armies. What I said in my pamphlet[3] last year about the character of the *mobilised* Prussian army, has been fully confirmed.

Delightful is the embarrassment of the National Association- ites[4] since Bismarck has plagiarised their programme; those fellows will now have to oppose their own Great-Prussia phrases, exactly as the *Kreuz-Zeitung* did with its own feudal phrases.

The London correspondent of *The Manchester Guardian* reports that in this solemn performance of state[5] Louis Bonaparte has made the following conditions the price for his approval: Sardinia from Italy, Luxemburg, Saarlouis and Saarbrücken from Prussia (Landau is the only thing he has forgotten)—and that is the minimum.

I shall see if I can complete my article on Poland[6] tomorrow. To be quite frank, it is a sacrifice for me to provide that jackass Miall with contributions when one is for ever being explicitly reminded that the editors do not accept responsibility for the section from contributors, whilst they obviously do so for the asininities printed elsewhere in the paper.[7] If I had known beforehand how our pieces were going to be treated in a paper[8] which is after all supposed to be our own—or at least to belong to the workers' party, and that we were merely going to be thus tolerated in it, and we are supposed to be grateful, as it were, into the bargain,— I would not have written a single line. But you were sick at the time, and I didn't want to do anything that might disturb your convalescence. But I was vexed by it nonetheless. All the same, one has said 'A' and must see that one also says 'B'.

Kindest regards.

Your

F. E.