---
id: MECW42-315
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 8, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 January 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "Source: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Correspondence (Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1975).  Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p.514"
status: raw
---

*To Friedrich Engels in Manchester*

DEAR FRED,

I have ditto received the *Staats-Anzeiger* and the *Beobachter*[1] from Kugelmann. I am returning you your *Staats-Anzeiger* today. Also the COPY Kugelmann sent me of the letter from the colonel[2] who arranged the whole thing.[3] Württemberg is now sufficiently provided. In my opinion,—with special regard to sales—Austria is now the most important. Notabene, if you have the patience to write more prescriptions.[4] Little Jenny, an expert in this respect, claims that you are developing great dramatic talent, or comic talent, in pursuing this action from 'different' viewpoints and in different disguises.

In the next few days—I am still a trifle limp, and do not feel much like writing—but as soon as I am quite on my feet I shall give Wilhelmchen.?[5] a good hiding. This is because of his identification of my views with the specific views of Wilhelm. Dühring's article[6] (he is lecturer at Berlin University) is very decent, particularly since I handled his master 'Carey' so roughly. Dühring obviously misunderstood various things. But the oddest thing is that he ranks me with Stein, because I pursue the dialectic, and Stein assembles thoughtlessly the greatest trivialities in clumsy hair-splitting, with a few Hegelian category conversions[7] Have you already received Borkheim's *Perle*[8]

It appears that professional poesy is simply a mask for the driest sort of prosiness. Take, for example, the Freiligrath family. Kate travels (on her honeymoon) to Paris with Kröker, the young corn usurer. However, since this noble man has 'business' to do at the same time, he leaves her alone in one of the big Paris hotels for 2-3 days. Kate and the whole FAMILY find this quite in order. Kate even writes delightedly that in the hotel they call her 'mademoiselle' (after she had spent the night together with Kröker there), and that all the waiters and even the porter give her friendly 'nods'. But even more: Kröker (after this business trip to the provinces) returns from Paris immediately to London with Kate, and the whole family is delighted that the 'HONEYMOON' is to be postponed for 6 months, since business 'comes first'. After all, for a poet the HONEYMOON is only a flower of speech, and can be 'celebrated' before or after the accouchement, early or late (the facts were related by the Freiligrath boys[9] in my house). Kate even seems to have read Clauren, for she described herself—from Paris—as a 'grass widow'.

The Yankees will show John Bull what's what. What do you think of the latest rodomontades of the Russians?

Dwarf Alberich[10] was very delighted by your letter.[11] He is just off to the gymnastics school, where he is doing great things.

Salut.

Your

K. M

Dear Fred

*Ad vocem*[12] *Dühring*.[13] It is a great deal from this man that he almost positively receives the section on *Primitive Accumulation*. He is still young. As a follower of Carey,[14] he is in direct opposition to the free-traders. Added to this he is a *university lecturer *and therefore not grieved that *Professor *Roscher, who blocks the way for all of them, should get some kicks.[15] One thing in his appraisal has struck me very much. Namely, so long as the determination of value by working time is left 'vague', as it is with Ricardo, it does not make people shaky. But as soon as it is brought into exact connection with the working day and its variations, a very unpleasant new light dawns upon them. I believe that an additional reason for Dühring to review my book at all was malice against Roscher. His fear of being treated like Roscher is certainly very easily perceptible. It is strange that the fellow does not sense the three fundamentally new elements of the book:

1) That in contrast to *all *former political economy, which *from the very outset *treats the different fragments of surplus value with their fixed forms of rent, profit, and interest as already given, I first deal with the general form of surplus value, in which all these fragments are still undifferentiated – in solution, as it were.

2) That the economists, without exception, have missed the simple point that if the commodity has a double character – use value and exchange value – then the labour represented by the commodity must also have a two-fold character, while the mere analysis of labour as such, as in Smith, Ricardo, etc, is bound to come up everywhere against inexplicable problems. This is, in fact, the whole secret of the critical conception.

3) That for the first time wages are presented as an irrational manifestation of a relation concealed behind them, and that this is scrupulously demonstrated with regard to the two forms of wages – time rates and piece rates. (It was a help to me that similar formulae are often found in higher mathematics.)

And as for Dühring's modest objections to the determination of value, he will be astonished to see in Volume 2 how little the determination of value 'directly' counts in bourgeois society. Indeed, *no form *of society can prevent the working time at the disposal of society from regulating production one way or another. So long, however, as this regulation is accomplished not by the direct and conscious control of society over its working time – which is possible only with common ownership – but by the movement of commodity prices, things remain as you have already quite aptly described them in the *Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher*.[16]

*Ad vocem* Vienna. I am sending you various Vienna papers (of which you must return to me the *Neues Wiener Tagblatt* which belongs to Borkheim, and keep the rest), from which you will see two things: firstly how important Vienna is at this moment as a market place, since there is new life there;[17] and secondly the way the matter should be handled there. I cannot find the address of Prof. Richter. Perhaps you have Liebknecht's letter which gives it. If not, ask him to send it to you, and then dispatch the article *direct to Richter*, but not via Liebknecht.

It seems to me that Wilhelmchen is by no means ALTOGETHER *bona fide*. He (for whom I have had to find so much time to make good his asininity in the *Allgemeine Augsburger*, etc.,)[18] has so far found *no time* even to *mention* publicly the title of my book[19] or my name. He overlooks the affair in the *Zukunft*[20] so as not to be put in the embarrassing position of sacrificing his own independent greatness. And there was also no time available to say a solitary word in the workers' paper (*Deutsche Arbeiterhalle*, Mannheim), which appears under the direct control of his friend Bebel. In short, it is certainly no fault of Wilhelmchen that my book has not been totally ignored. First, he has not read it (although to little Jenny he made fun of Richter, who thinks that he needs to understand a book before he can publicise it), and secondly, after he had read it or claimed to have read it, he has had no time, although he has time, since I got him Borkheim's SUBVENTION, to write letters twice weekly to Borkheim; although, instead of sending the shares[21] to Strohn for the money, which was transmitted to him through me and obtained by my good offices, he asks for Strohn's address, in order to play his tricks with him directly, behind my back, and swamp him with epistles as he does Borkheim. In short, Wilhelmchen wants to make himself important, and in particular the public should not be distracted from its interest in Wilhelmchen. We must now act half as if we did not notice this, but still treat him with caution. As for his call to Austria, you cannot believe him until it has happened.[22] And secondly if it should come to this, we shall not dissuade him, but IF NECESSARY, simply explain to him what I explained to him when he joined Brass's *Norddeutsche,*[23][24] that, if he should compromise himself again, he will be, if necessary, *publicly disavowed*. I told him this, in the presence of witnesses, when he moved off to Berlin at that time.

I think you can send articles direct to the enclosed *Neue Freie Presse* (Vienna). The present joint owner, Dr *Max Friedländer* (Lassalle's cousin and deadly enemy), was the person for whom I acted as a correspondent for a longish period for the old *Vienna* Presse and for the Oder-Zeitung.[25]

Finally, with regard to the *Internationale Revue*, Fox (who was sent to Vienna by an English paper to pay a visit and establish connections) asked me, from Vienna a few days ago, for a letter of introduction to Arnold Hilberg. I sent it to him, and at the same time told the said Hilberg in this letter that circumstances had prevented us writing, that we would do something this year, etc.[26]

*Fortnightly Review*. Professor *Beesly*, one of the triumviri who secretly direct this paper, has told his special friend Lafargue (whom he constantly invites to dine at his house) that he is morally certain (it completely depends upon him!) that a review[27] would be accepted. Lafargue would hand it in to him himself.

*Ad vocem* *Pyat*. In today's *Times* you will see the ADDRESS of the FRENCH DEMOCRATS about FENIANISM[28] (which appeared 4 weeks ago) and was sent in by Pyat.[29] What has happened is this. T h e French government has launched an investigation (particularly *visites domiciliaires*[30] at the homes of our correspondents in Paris) against the International Association as a *société illicite*.[31] Ditto probably sent to the British government letters about FENIANISM written by our Dupont.[32] Mr Pyat, who always ran down our 'Association' as non-revolutionary, Bonapartist, etc., is afraid of this TURN of things, and is swiftly seeking to give the appearance that *he* has something to do with the matter and is 'MOVING'.

*Ad vocem Benedek*:[33] can I have the journal for A FEW DAYS? YOU have now proven yourself twice a prophet, firstly a tactical prophet (in the Sevastopol affair), and secondly a strategic prophet (in the Prussian-Austrian affair).[34] But the sense of sensible men cannot predict the stupidities of which man is capable.

*Ad vocem carbuncles*. Consulted doctors. Nothing new. Everything which the gentlemen have to say indicates that one has to have private means to live in accordance with their prescriptions, instead of being a poor devil like me, poverty-stricken as a church-mouse. When you see Gumpert, you can tell him that I feel (up to THIS MOMENT that I write) a stinging prickle in my body, that is my blood. It seems to me that for this year I shall not be quite over the affair.

MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS Burns .

Salut.