---
id: MECW42-259
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, September 12, 1867"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 September 1867"
year: 1867
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 12 September 1867

Dear Moor,

You have *not* enclosed letter No. 2 from Lessner.[1] If Lafargue does come, I would much appreciate it if you came too,[2] as I do not rightly know how to entertain our comrade during my business hours. If possible, you should come straight away tomorrow, or at least on the morning of the day after, so that we can be together on Saturday and Sunday, and I can also more easily take some French leave on Monday. But write or telegraph beforehand, so that I can arrange lodging (telegraph the office, except Saturday after 11.0.a.m. and Sunday).

£5 enclosed to help with money-matters; apart from the cost of travelling here, you can leave it at home for your wife.

Here, too, the press is treating the International much more decently than before. *All* the newspapers here have carried some part of the proceedings,[3] the *Examiner* & *Times*[4] had a philistinish-ly benevolent LEADER.

Would it not be appropriate also to report on the meetings of the CENTRAL COUNCIL in the German newspapers? e.g., the *Zukunft;* Wilhelmchen[5] might perhaps find somewhere else, too. Where actually is the noble fellow now?

The Lassalleans are beset by a fresh shindig again. Dr Reincke in Hagen and Schweitzer are AT DAGGERS DRAWN. Reincke went along with the party-of-Progress clique—Bürgers and E. Richter — to ensure his election in Hagen, Düsseldorf and Solingen, but failed in the two latter.

We really must try to establish a direct link with the workers in Germany again, that is what we most lack, otherwise everything is buoyant enough.

I read of the betrothal of *Käthe,*[6] as she calls herself, in the *Kölnische Zeitung.*

You will have to give me a verbal account of the congress telegrams from Germany.

The *Courrier*[7] returned herewith. Apropos of the vote in Schleswig, it is splendid how those jackasses declared: *avons une carte devant nous,*[8] which shows Holstein within Schleswig (or vice versa)! Likewise, they first have the *Federal troops* and then the *Dutch* (instead of the Luxemburgers themselves) marching into Luxemburg. And it is they who want to abolish IGNORANCE!

Your

F. E.