---
id: MECW42-327
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, February 11, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 February 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 February 1868
7 Southgate

Memorandum from Engels to Mr Moor[1]

I have received your letter and that from your HONOURABLE SECRETARY[2] and return enclosed the Viennese cuttings and Meyer's letter. What a frightful tragedy at the Weydemeyers.[3] I am of the opinion that an article should be contributed to the *Debatte* (via Richter), and that one should strike while the iron is hot.[4] It will be sent this week. The **specialist criticism** in the *Frankfurter Börsenzeitung* is extremely amusing.[5] It is significant that these Viennese literary gents, all Jews as cunning as foxes, who well know all the tricks, should regard the German press outside Austria as *bona fide.*

Dühring amuses me very much. The thrusts at Roscher, Mill, etc., were a godsend for him—but what a difference there is between the embarrassed tone of the criticism[6] and the saucy nature of the pamphlet.[7]

I do not believe either there will be war, if only because the Peace League[8] describes it as unavoidable; in any case, Sadowa[9] has made it impossible for Bonaparte to start a war against Germany without great alliances. And since *at the best* he could only get Austria (England, as always, or more than ever, would not count militarily), and would have Prussia and Russia against him, the whole business is fishy. Italy is no good either, and furthermore he mucked things up for himself there. HE IS FLOORED. Even the great Karl Schurz, ex-student General Fart,[10] has confided this to Bismarck secretly.

It is nearly 7 o'clock, and I have not had dinner yet. I must go home first, so enough for today.

Your

F. E.