---
id: MECW42-062
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 7, 1865"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 March 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 42, p. 117; First published: abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Berlin, 1930."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 7 March 1865**

**Dear Fred**,

My brother-in-law is leaving today to return to the Cape. I've got to accompany him onto the ship. So, I'm very short of time — hence just the following in the utmost brevity:

1. *Ad vocem Bruhn.* A worker in Paris received a letter from a worker in Hamburg saying that Bruhn is slandering us in every way he can. Firstly, he says I owe him 60 talers which I never repaid. Secondly, you and I are said to have sold the Prussian government, or rather 'Police-Chief Stieber', a manuscript about the refugees. The Parisian sent the letter to Lessner, who passed it on to me. I replied to Lessner by return of post, for communication to the Parisian, that I had *never* had any financial dealings with Bruhn (which I believed at that time to be the case), and in general considered that for Bruhn to ever have 60 talers to his name was like something out of Munchausen. Furthermore, I explained the affair of Bangya and the manuscript, in which connection our declaration of April 1853 in the *New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung* [*Hirsch's Confessions*] and references to it in *Herr Vogt* page such and such were to be consulted. **Well**! Then Bruhn's letter arrived. So, I racked my brains and think I remember the following: in the spring of 1849 I came to Hamburg to collect money for the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung*. I had just enough in **my pocket** to get to Hamburg. However, stayed 14 days in a **first rate** hotel. I explained to Baron Frisch, who later intended to send us donations, that I needed money to pay the hotel bill and my return fare. I now have a dim recollection that since I didn't want to take the money as a '**present'** from him and he for his part didn't want it back, it was agreed that *Bruhn* who was just as much a scoundrel then as now, should receive it. I had forgotten the whole bloody business; however, I now wrote to Bruhn that I couldn't remember any financial transaction with *him.* Since the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* was banned when I got back to Cologne from Hamburg and I myself was kicked out of Prussia, it was possible that in the whirl of events at the time I had forgotten. It is still striking that he waited from 1849 to 1865 to *remind* me. But it was a simple matter. He should let me know by letter how much he thought he had on me and send me Grubel's address. I would then write to Grubel myself. If the latter *confirmed* what he said, his demand would be satisfied. This procedure is absolutely essential, as I am *still* uncertain about the matter *even at this moment,* and the way I have been fleeced by claims of this kind is really scandalous.

2. From the *enclosed from Schily you will* see what transpired in Paris whither we sent Le Lubez to settle the disputes that had broken out there. (We had given *Schily* ditto **full power** to negotiate, as we were aware of Le Lubez's bias towards Lefort. Here I should just mention in passing that *Beluze,* President of the People's Bank, who controls the few Paris Associations and their organ *L'Association,* is *with* Lefort.) *What else happens —* which will only be concluded this evening, as far as our intervention is concerned — in the *next letter.*

3. The things from *Siebel* returned. It strikes me as *most unfortunate* that he gives *London* as the origin of the notice put in the *Düsseldorfer Zeitung,* thus exposing *me* as the presumed author.

4. Letter from Liebknecht enclosed.

5. One copy of the circular from the Geneva **Branch Association** enclosed.

6. The letter from Meissner enclosed.

7. *Lange:* not to be directly rebuffed. Write and tell him that he would do best to post the thing to you, 2 **copies**, and you would send one to me each time. As he rightly realises himself, after our recent experience we would have to hold back *for the present* from making contributions to any German paper. He would, of course, have the same right as any other **Editor** of a journal to reprint whatever extracts he liked from your pamphlet.

*Salut.*

Your
K. M.

The first numbers (2 sheets) of Blind's *Eidgenosse* have come, with the only contributions by Blind, Struve and Rasch. Trivia. Emblem consisting of hand with dagger, to kill the 'tyrants'.