---
id: MECW42-324
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 1, 1868"
volume: 42
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "1 February 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 1 February 1868

Dear FRED,

I hope that you are not also indisposed, since you have not written to me this week, and not returned the letters of Kugelmann and Kertbény (I need them to reply).[1] Last Tuesday I went out to the Museum[2] and for a stroll. On Wednesday a new eruption broke out. It is smaller, and does not prevent me sitting, since it is on the upper side of my left thigh. Walking is harmful, however, because of the friction and the spreading of the inflammation. I believe this monster will die out during this week. After the numerous disappointments, I scarcely dare to hope that no more follow. The devil take this mucky business.

Enclosed a letter from Schily. According to him, things look rotten in Paris, as does everything connected with Moses.[3] Reclus does not seem to me to be the right man either.[4] There can naturally be no question of the Pole[5] in Geneva. As soon as your article for the *Fortnightly*[6] is AT HAND, Lafargue will do it into French for the *Courrier français.*

From the enclosed Viennese cuttings, which Fox sent me from Vienna, you can see how Lassalle and Delitzsch[7] are rampant there. At the same time as the rascal Bernhard Becker turned up there as a great man. He is now a 'Great-German'[8] in the Bismarck style.

If you still have a copy of your article in the *Frankfurter Borsenzeitung,*[9] send it to me.[10]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

The Freiligrath begging campaign[11] is going ahead; it has already raised over 32,000 talers.