---
id: MECW20-051
title: "Original Draft Resolution on the Conflict in the Paris Section"
volume: 20
doc_type: chapter
author: Karl Marx
written: "4 March 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 20, p. 330; First published: in Marx and Engels, Works, 2nd Russian Edition, Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960."
status: raw
---

This document has survived in Marx's Notebook and is the Central Council's draft resolutions submitted by Marx to the Standing Committee (Sub-Committee). The latter discussed the conflict in the Paris Section at its meetings of March 4 and 6, 1865, at which the French delegates Tolain and Limousin were also present. The draft formed the basis of the final text of the resolution on the split in the Paris Section. The resolution itself was adopted, on the Standing Committee's proposal, by the Central Council on March 7, 1865.
This document was published in English for the first time in *The General Council of the First International. 1864-1866, *1962.

I propose the following resolutions to the Sub-Committee.

1) The present Paris branch Administration, consisting of Citizens Tolain, Fribourg, and Limousin, is confirmed in its functions by the London Central Council, which also expresses them its thanks for their zeal and activity;

2) The adjunction of Citizen *Pierre* Vinçard to the Paris branch Administration is thought desirable;[1]

3) While thanking Citizen Lefort for the part he took in the foundation of the International Society, and earnestly wishing for his collaboration, as *homme de conseil,* with the Paris branch Administration, the London Central Council at the same time consider themselves not entitled to impose Citizen Lefort in any official capacity upon the Paris branch Administration.

4) Citizen *Victor Schily is* appointed the Paris *delegate* of the London Central Council.

In this character he has to act only with the Paris branch *Administration.* He will exercise that *droit de surveillance* which the Paris branch themselves have thought proper to acknowledge as a necessary attribute of the Central Council under the present political conjuncture.[2]