---
id: MECW20-055
title: "Record of the Central Council Meeting (January 16, 1866)"
volume: 20
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "16 January 1866"
year: 1866
publication: "Source: Documents of the First International. The General Council of the First International, 1864-1866. The London Conference 1865. Minutes, published by the Foreign Languages Publishing House, Mosco"
status: raw
---

Eccarius in the chair.

Minutes read and confirmed.

Citizens Longuet et Crespelle were nominated members of the Council.

*Marx* communicated to the Council the receipt by Fox of a letter of thanks by Mrs. O'Donovan for his articles in the *Workman's Advocate* [P. Fox, "The British Coup d'État in Ireland", "The Influence of Irish National Feeling Upon the Relations Between Great Britain and the United States", "The Irish Difficulty Continued", *The Workman's Advocate*, October 14, 21, 28, 1865] on Fenianism, and the reprint, in the same paper, of the appeal for the support of the convicted Fenians. ["The State Prisoners. An Appeal to the Women of Ireland", *The Workman's Advocate*, January 6, 1866]

*Marx* proposed Citizen Longuet's nomination in his place as correspondent for Belgium. Seconded by *Jung.* Accepted.

*Jung* read a letter of Dujonquoy (Hotel de New York) requesting the payment of £7 17s. owed to him from the times of the Conference. [The London Conference, September 25-29, 1865]

A discussion followed in which *Le Lubez, Jung, Dupont, Wheeler, Lessner,* and others took part.

*Cremer*: The members of the Council and the Association ought [to] pay their cards immediately.

*Jung* proposes: That Dupont should tell Dujonquoy that the Council having not been largely attended, part of the bill be paid on Wednesday next and a definite answer given. *Seconded by Lessner.*

*Jung reads*: *Talbot, of Caen, letter,* and one pound (for 20 cards) (to Dupont).

Propaganda in different towns of the departments of Calvados, Orne, La Manche.

Mr. *Wheeler* moves: That notice be given that everyone who does not (renew) pay his card until 15th February, will cease to be member of the Association. (To be advertised in the *Advocate.*) *Seconded by Citizen Jung.* Carried.

*Werecki* (as *delegate of the Poles*) explains their absence on the Standing Committee. On Monday they had a meeting and got the necessary money together. After some discussion, as to the place of meeting, *St. Martin's Hall,* next *Monday* (*22 January*)*, 8 o'clock* in the evening.

*Cremer* read the *Appeal to the British Members.* Accepted Address. Difficulty as to the signature of the names. *Moved* subscription-sheets to be printed. Carried on the motion of Wheeler.