---
id: MECW20-021
title: "A Correction (April 1865)"
volume: 20
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 April 1865"
year: 1865
publication: "First published: in Der weibe Adler No. 48, April 22, 1865; Translation: The General Council of the First International. 1864-66, Moscow, 1962"
status: raw
---

After the two motions of Messrs. Beales and Leverson, mentioned in No. 30 of your newspaper, had been carried by the Polish meeting in London on March 1, *Mr. Peter Fox* (an Englishman), on behalf of the *International Working Men's Association*, proposed

"that an integral and independent Poland is an indispensable condition of democratic Europe, and that so long as this condition is unfulfilled, revolutionary triumphs on the Continent are short-lived [...] preludes to prolonged periods of counter-revolutionary rule."

After briefly outlining the history of the evils which had befallen Europe as a result of the loss of liberty by Poland, and of Russia's policy of conquest, Mr. P. Fox said that the stand of the *Liberal* party on this question did not coincide with that of the *democratic* society for which he was speaking. The motto of conservative Europe was: an enslaved Europe with an enslaved Poland as a basis. The motto of the International Working Men's Association was, on the contrary: a free Europe based upon a free and independent Poland.

*Mr. Eccarius* (a German worker, Vice-President of the International Working Men's Association) seconded the motion, referring in detail to the share Prussia had taken in the various partitions of Poland. In conclusion he said:

"The downfall of the Prussian monarchy is the *conditio sine qua non* for the establishment of Germany and the re-establishment of Poland."

*Mr. Le Lubez*, a French member of the *International Working Men's Association*, likewise spoke in support of the motion, which was *carried unanimously, amid the continuous cheering of the meeting.*

*The Daily News* and a few other "liberal" London dailies *omitted* this part of the report, being vexed by the triumph of the *International Working Men's Association*, without whose collaboration, incidentally, the Polish meeting at St. Martin's Hall could not have taken place at all. On behalf of the International Working Men's Association, I request you to print this correction.

London, etc.

H. Jung,
Corresponding Secretary
of the International Working Men's Association for Switzerland