---
id: MECW47-186
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, July 23, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "23 July 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 23 July 1885

My dear Laura,

Very glad to learn that our prisoner[1] is going soon again to breathe *l'air pur de la liberté (sans égalité et fraternité)*[2] and [...][3]

Of course Deville is quite innocent of the trick of Hyndman and Co.[4] — for it is said that the 'John Broadhouse' who figure-heads as translator, is the immortal Hyndman himself— and I hope the thing may blow over. Perhaps it was merely concocted between Hyndman and Kegan Paul to set us on, for Kegan Paul has not heard from me for a long time, considering that I cannot as yet fix a date when we shall be ready. At all events we cannot have anything about this pre- tended publication. Of course it would be best if it turned out a mere *Schreckschüsse*[5] But if not, I am bound to declare publicly that the lat- ter half of the résumé does *not* render the original correctly. I told Deville so, before it was printed,^6 and yet it was printed in the old shape, 'because the publisher would not wait'. That could be al- lowed to pass unnoticed in France, where the French edition is in the market. But it will never do here, so long as there is no English translation out,[6] or so long as it is brought out in competition to that.

The little squabble amongst the German deputies has on the whole had excellent effects. The workingmen have everywhere shown such an energetic front against these ridiculous pretensions that the big men in Parliament are not likely to repeat their attempt at domineer- ing.[7] This our men have done in the most unmistakable way and in spite of all the trammels of the Socialist Law.[8] In the meantime poor Liebknecht is hurrying from one end of Germany to the other preach- ing concord and telling everybody that there are no differences of principle, that it's all personal squabbles, that both sides have committed faults, etc.— the hen that has hatched ducklings. He has been hatching 'heducated' socialists for the last twenty years and now ob- stinately refuses to see that the chickens are ducklings, the socialists are philanthropic *Spiessburger.*[9]

Most happy am I to see that the *scrutin de liste*^5 invented to per- petuate Opportunist government, is likely to smash up Opportunism altogether.[10] If Clemenceau keeps only one half of what he prom- ises, if he merely *initiates* the break-up of the vast French bureaucracy, it will be an immense progress. On the other hand, even supposing him to really intend being sincere and a man of his word, he will find so many real obstacles, he will so soon be brought to a standstill, that to the Paris electors he will always appear as a traitor. It is a delusion to think that in France Anglo-Saxon, especially American local self- government can be introduced without upsetting the whole bourgeois régime. So, very soon he will have to choose: either drop his reforms and remain bourgeois *avec les bourgeois*[11] or go on and revolutionise himself. I think he will remain bourgeois, and then our time may come.

Schorlemmer is here, has as yet no definite projects for Continental tours, but keeps his mind's eye on Paris. He is out at present, may re- turn before I close this.

Here too we shall have a peaceable revolution in November. The new electorate is sure to change the whole basis of old parties.[12] The Whigs have already declared through their great mouthpiece *The Edinburgh Review* that there must be now 'a parting of the waters': the Radicals are to shift for themselves and the Whigs intend joining the Tories who, they find, are not so bad after all.[13] Whether the Tories will accept them, and on what terms, remains to be seen. The fact is that this alliance has been on the tapis for the last 10 years, but al- ways broke down on the question of the division of the spoil. Another progress: we shall very likely get all the rotten 'representative work- ing men' into Parliament. That is just the place where we want them.

Pumps wants us to go Jersey this year; if we do, and Paul is out, will you come and join us there, and then come over to London? Steamers from *St Malo* — or will you wait in Paris till Jollymeier comes and brings you over? You might ruminate that a bit and let me know. We cannot leave before 8th or 10th August on account of Percy's busi- ness.[14]

Love from Nim and Jollymeier.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels