---
id: MECW47-289
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, September 24, 1886"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 September 1886"
year: 1886
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 24 September 1886

My dear Laura,

I suppose you are at this moment at the Assize Court watching Paul's trial,;[1] I hope it will end in an acquittal. In the meantime I have a bit of agreeable news for you. Meissner sends this morning account for last seasons sales, and the result is a profit of 2,600 marks or about £130 for us, after deducting all expenses of the second volume[2] so your share will be above £40-. I have told him to remit the money, and as soon as received I shall send you a cheque for your share. There were sold 320 copies of Volume I and 1,260 of Volume II.

The English edition[3] will hardly be out before the New Year.[4] It looks as if Sonnenschein had more pressing things on hand, and in the hands of the same printer, by which our book was pushed back. The thing is proceeding, but rather slowly.

I had a letter from Tussy on her arrival in New York,[5] she had a very pleasant voyage, but w.as rather disappointed at the live American bourgeois she met on board, it rather dampened her en- thusiasm for America, but prepared her for the realities of American life.

Old Becker[6] has been with me this last week, he is very jolly but getting rather rickety in body. He will leave for Paris next Tuesday[7] and hopes to see you there.[8] He is a splendid old chap, seventy-eight and still quite abreast of the movement.

No news from Schorlemmer here. How about your journey to Lon- don? You will be able to come to a resolution, if that be still necessary, after to-day's verdict. But even if Paul should be sent to Pélagie again, 4 °^2 that is not so pressing, surely they will give him a few weeks leave and so you and he might still come over for a bit.

Ever yours affectionately,

F. Engels