---
id: MECW47-006
title: "Letter to Thomas James Knowles, April 17, 1883"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "17 April 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO THOMAS JAMES KNOWLES

IN LONDON

[Draft]

[London,] 17 April 1883

Dear Sir,

There exists a manuscript — a critical résumé of *Das Kapital* by me[1] — among the papers of the late Dr Marx, but up to to-day we have been unable to find it amongst the mass of papers left by him.

However, even if found, I should hesitate to send it to you at least for the purpose you indicate.[2] I am not aware that it is usual, in the literature of this or any other country, for one author to lend his manuscripts to another.

As to our experience of English review-writers it has not been very encouraging. With the exception of a few clergymen of the Church of England, they have invariably distorted our views and disfigured our actions. Their utter ignorance of our theory and practice has been equalled only by their presumption. The *XIX Century* I believe, in July 1878, published an article of George Howell on the International[3] brimfull of untruths and inaccuracies. Marx sent you a reply[4] but you refused to insert it.

I am afraid, if you want to acquaint yourself with Marx's views you will have to read the German, Russian or French edition of *Das Kapital.*

I know but one living Englishman capable of giving a correct account of the contents of *Das Kapital.* It is a barrister in Manchester.[5] If you desire I shall be glad to ask him whether he is willing to undertake the task for you.

Yours faithfully

Jos. Knowles Esq. the Hollies, Clapham Common

S.W.