---
id: MECW47-035
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, October 15, 1883"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "15 October 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Colle"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 15 October 1883

My dear Laura,

My last letter was awfully rough. But I was not allowed to sit long at the desk, and *had* to write — as you will allow — to Deville first.[1]

So I could only say a few words to you and these must have looked very unkind indeed. Pardon me.

Well, I have made up my mind *d'en finir avec cette sacrée maladie chronique.*[2] Since last Wednesday night[3] I have stayed in bed, in order to do away with any excuse for the constant cause of all my relapses, want of rest and temptation for moving about. To-day I feel quite well, and inclined for a dance. But that is just the time when absolute rest is most needed, and therefore I shall not stir out of bed until bed will do me more harm than good. If nothing unexpected occurs, I think I shall be *en pleine guérison*[4] before the week is out. So now, that will satisfy you I hope as far as my health is concerned.

I perfectly understand what Jollymeier meant by his letter to you. Gumpert had given him the note of warning — *awfully exaggerated,* though, for my case — but Gumpert could not interfere in my treat- ment by another doctor. Still I think Jollymeier might have found another way to save Gumpert's scruples as to medical étiquette with- out frightening you. As it is, I have used your letter to stir up my doc- tors a bit, and with success. *Ich hab'* *ihnen Beine gemacht*[5] and energetic treatment is now all the rage.

But enough of that. All I am sorry for, and very sorry, is that I res- ponded in such an unkind way to your letter and to the kind feeling which had dictated it. It has weighed on my mind all the time, and yet I would not again write to you until I could indicate a decided improvement and good reasons for an approaching final cure.

Fortin has written, he wants a preface[6] and asks about 20 questions which it would take a year to answer thoroughly. Tussy was here when his letter came, I read it to her and I wish you could have heard us laugh at that never ending series of inquiries, each requiring a volume to answer it completely. I shall ask him to send me the manu- script[7] and put off the rest for better times.

Read to-day proof-sheet[8] up to page 600. Tussy has promised to look up the American reports for Paul.

It is getting post-time and dinner-time too. But before concluding: Deville writes to say he has no time to recast the 3 chapters indicated by me. Please do, you and Paul, as much as you can, to get him to revise them as much as possible. Such as they are, they are not intelli- gible but to those who know the original. He says the publisher will give no time. But the whole cannot be printed at once!! A fortnight will do it and it will be a *wonderful improvement.*

Kind regards to the prisoner[9] now soon to be free.

A kiss from Nim and from your affectionate

F. Engels