---
id: MECW47-046
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, January 14, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "14 January 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. I, Paris, 1956 Extract: *Marx Engels on Literature and Art*, Progress Publishers, 1976;"
status: raw
---

*To Laura Lafargue in Paris*

My dear Laura,

Herewith cheque £15.- which I hope will stop the landlord's cravings. The same dearth of news of which you complain, reigns supreme here, and old Nim and I have the house much to ourselves, of which I at least do not much complain, being still rather shaky and progressing only slowly. Percy is very busy in his new concern, and has had very poor health lately, rheumatism, erysipelas of the nose, and to wind up, catarrh of the stomach. Tussy and Aveling called yesterday. 'Yesterday' reminds me of *To-Day* which I suppose you have got. A rather motley society of most of which lot Heine said: *Viel dunklere Wolke war die Idee, die ihr im Herzen getragen!*[1] Well, it's a beginning, and they will weed each other out in time.

Do you receive the *Sozialdemokrat*? If not, let me know. There ought to be an exchange of publications between Zurich and Paris which you might organise, it will prevent such blunders and misunderstandings as were current some time ago. Kautsky wishes to translate Deville's *Capital*, has a copy been sent to Zurich? If not please see to it (address Redaktion *Sozialdemokrat*, Volksbuchhandlung, Hottingen-Zurich, Suisse). If this translation be done, I shall require another copy to be sent to Meissner, to prevent unpleasantness hereafter. I shall let you know, as soon as it is settled. Herewith 5 photos of Mohr and 4 of mine. Of Mohr's you can have as many as you like, large or small.

Paul's examples of victorious German "*goût*" are mostly as old as the hills. That German *gravures pour enfants* (*Bilderbogen*) are generally good, is simple enough. For more than 50 years they have been made chiefly at Dusseldorf, Munich, etc., and the designs are by young and often rising artists who do this work to earn a little money. 40 years ago, however, I recollect that French gravures of that sort came to Germany, a good many by Adam the horse-and-soldier-painter, and they were immensely superior to the German ones in chic and life. If that has not been continued by French artists, they must have found no market. — As to *toys,* the German superiority is 1) cheapness, domestic industry at starvation level (described lately by Dr. Emanuel Sax, *die Hausindustrie in Thüringen*, very good) and 2) in that they are invented by *peasants*; townspeople never will be fit to invent for children, least of all French townspeople who hate their own children. — For *furniture* Paul gives the reason himself: the stupid fiscal policy of the French Government. — Flow*ers* similar: division of labour and low wages: who can compete against the East End of London and Germany in cheapness? Generally speaking, bourgeois taste is getting so much out of taste that even the Germans may hope to be able to satisfy it. And if any trade has become broken down enough to make "cheap and nasty" its market-rule, then you may be sure the Germans will step in and defeat all competition by starving their own work-people. And as this is the rule generally now for all trades, it explains the appearance of German goods in all trades and all markets.

As to toys, the German superiority is 1) cheapness, domestic industry at starvation level (described lately by Dr Emanuel Sax, *Die Hausindustrie in Thüringen*, very good) and 2) in that they are invented by peasants; townspeople never will be fit to invent for children, least of all French townspeople who hate their own children.

For *furniture* Paul gives the reason himself: the stupid fiscal policy of the French government.

*Flowers* similar: division of labour and low wages: who can compete against the East End of London and Germany in cheapness? Generally speaking, bourgeois taste is getting so much out of taste that even the Germans may hope to be able to satisfy it. And if any trade has become broken down enough to make 'cheap and nasty' its marketrule, then you may be sure the Germans will step in and defeat all competition by starving their own workpeople. And as this is the rule generally now for all trades, it explains the appearance of German goods in all trades and all markets.

I sent Lavroff last Thursday's *Standard* containing a report of an interview of their correspondent with a Petersburg police chief and in which Lavroffis blamed for all — the whole thing of course got up for the benefit of the philistine, but so stupidly that the effect aimed at is visible plainly in every word.

Jollymeier left here last Monday, better a good deal, but not yet himself again. Sam Moore did not come at all, he had a bad catarrh of the stomach and is now busy at the court of chancery in Manchester and Liverpool. He is doing very well indeed in law-business, for a beginner.

Had a letter from Meyer[2] this morning informing me that he will not be here till March, and asking from me nothing less than to forward to him all the material I have for the history of German Socialism up to 1852! which of course I want myself for Mohr's biography. Of course I shall decline.

Nim sends her love to you and Paul, and to use the sacramental philistine British phrase, I 'join' her.

Very affectionately yours,

F.E.