---
id: MECW47-146
title: "Letter to Hermann Schluter, January 13, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 January 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 13 January 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

By all means start with the *Anti-Dühring* as soon as convenient.[1]

I have not read the philistine's reply,[2] nor do I wish to do so. Reply he cannot and he's welcome to lay about him with as much insolent verbiage as he wishes.

I have long been searching in vain for the *Rheinische Zeitung Revue.* I only have numbers *3, 5* and *6;* 1, 2 and 4 are missing. There are virtually no articles in them worth reprinting. Numbers 1-4 contain Marx's history of the French Revolution from 1848 to 1850[3] (comprised in the *18th Brumaire)* and my account of events in May 1849 in the Rhineland and Baden-Palatinate.[4] Then the *Peasant War*[5] (5 and 6) and short critical essays, as also a review of daily events.

The right to work is not touched on other than very briefly in, I think, Number I; Marx wasn't much interested in catchphrases.

It would be quite a good idea for you to inquire from Wigand in your own name about a new edition of the *Condition etc.,* but that won't get us very much further. I have got to know how I stand with him in law and shall inquire again from Freytag. N. B. I am assuming that, as soon as the matter is sufficiently advanced, you will come to an understanding with Dietz, as he does in fact have, or might assert, a prior claim.

Regards to Ede.

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels