---
id: MECW47-312
title: "Letter to Horatio Bryan Donkin, February 8, 1886"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: "Eleanor Marx-Aveling"
written: "8 February 1886"
year: 1886
publication: "Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

AVELING TO HORATIO BRYAN DONKIN

IN LONDON

[London,] 8 February 1886
35 Great Russell St., W. C.

My dear Dr Donkin,

I have heard of the Club—and I am much obliged to Mr Pearson for asking me to join it.[1] But I cannot — for these reasons. First, I think many members of the Club would decidedly object to my belonging to it. You see, it is a very different matter to advocate certain things, in theory, and to have the courage to put one's theory into practice. Probably, many of the good ladies in the Club would be much shocked at the idea of my becoming a member of it, and I should only be giving Mr Pearson trouble if I accepted his friendly suggestion. But there is also another reason. I have, as it is, hardly a moment of time for real study, a half the work I *ought* to do I don't do. And apart from this, any time not taken up in trying to earn bread (and it is *so* difficult for a woman to do like that!) I feel I must give to what seems to me the highest and most important work I could do — i.e. the propaganda of Socialism.

It would not be right to join this Club well knowing that I could not undertake to 'wilt progress' for it, or attend its meetings regularly, or even take such an interest in it as a member ought to take. If, however, mere 'visitors' are admitted, and no one objects to me, I shall be very glad to go to any meeting and take part in any discussion on a question of which I know something.[2] — Please thank Mr Pear-