---
id: MECW47-029
title: "Letter to Pasquale Martignetti, August 22, 1883"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 August 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published in *La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895,* Milano, 1964 Printed according to the original. Translated from the Italian Published in English for the first time in "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

England, Eastbourne, 22 August 1883

4 Cavendish Place

Dear Citizen,

Please excuse my delay in replying to your letter of 25/6 and your postcard of 30/7.[1] The need to finish in a short time the text of the 3rd German edition of *Capital*[2] forced me to suspend all correspondence.

I do not know much about Ahn's method, and the dictionary you mention is entirely unknown to me. In order to learn a language the method I have always followed is this: I do not bother with grammar (except for declensions and conjugations, and pronouns) and I read, with a dictionary, the most difficult classical author I can find. Thus I began Italian with Dante, Petrarch and Ariosto, Spanish with Cervantes and Calderon, Russian with Pushkin. Then I read newspapers, etc. For German, I think the first part of Goethe's *Faust* might be suitable; it is written, for the most part, in a popular style, and the things which would seem difficult to you would also be difficult, without a commentary, for a German reader.

For the works of Marx, etc., you could approach the offices of the *Sozialdemokrat,* Hottingen-Zurich, Switzerland; it is the official organ of the German workers' party.

Thank you for the copies of the translation, which reached me in good condition, and also for kindly sending your photograph, in return for which I enclose mine.

Yours with regards,

F. Engels

The normal London address is fine; I am here at the seaside for a few weeks.