---
id: MECW47-241
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, February 24, 1886"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 February 1886"
year: 1886
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Book I, Moscow, 1924 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

[London, 24 February 1886]

Dear Ede,

Your articles[1] on the subject of C. A. Schramm[2] were very nice and caused us much glee. The man's pretty well done for.

The new turn things have taken in France is most significant. See *Cri du Peuple.* On the 7th, Château d'Eau meeting[3] at which Basly disassociated himself from the Radicals.[4] On the 11th, in the Chamber, Basly's interpellation re Decazeville,[5] seconded by Camélinat and Boyer, applauded by Clovis Hugues and Planteau — separation from the Radicals, *formation of parliamentary workers' party.*[6]

Splendid *entrée en scène.* Great chagrin of the Radicals over these highly unparliamentary goings-on. The three working men are to be punished by a vote of no confidence on the part of the bourgeois constituents. Meeting called at Château d'Eau for 21 inst, but cancelled upon the three declaring their intention to attend. Instead a meeting *du commerce* at the Château d'Eau announced, to discuss public works for the benefit of the unemployed, in fact for the purpose of obtaining a vote of censure against the 3. But instead a great victory for the working men, Basly in the chair, the bourgeois walk out, brilliant speech by Guesde. See *Cri du Peuple* of 23rd inst.[7]

The French parliamentary workers' party is a great historic event and a great stroke of luck for Germany. Will make certain persons in Berlin stir their stumps. Moreover, wholly international; chauvinistic heckling fell completely flat.

Your

F.E.