---
id: MECW47-068
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, March 7, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "7 March 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Published in English for the first"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 7 March 1884

Dear Sorge,

After suffering continuously throughout the whole autumn and winter from a minor if very tiresome disorder, and spending 2 months resting in bed, I am at last sufficiently recovered to be able to work regularly and to pay off the letters I owe. I trust that you and your wife will also gradually get over the after-effects of your far more serious illness and then gradually resume your old way of life.

Since I am not yet completely mobile and my excursions are limited to the immediate neighbourhood, and not having anyone to send out on errands, I carried out your commission in rather a different way. Your copy of *Capital,* 3rd edition,[1] and likewise one of Deville's *Le Capital,* were despatched to you in 2 parcels per BOOK POST; I shall send the photographs in the same manner, having now found out how to pack them. No doubt you will be able to obtain the other 2 copies of *Capital* easily enough over there.

I have taken out a year's subscription to *To-Day* for you and you will, no doubt, be getting it regularly. The chaps are very well-intentioned but damnably ignorant; which may be all right for *To-Day,* but now the DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION is bringing out a weekly journal, *Justice,* which is conspicuous for the exceeding boredom of its invariably repetitive contents and for its total inability to get hold of the right end of the stick even when dealing with a question of the day. I shall send you a couple of issues; it's not worth taking. All in all, the DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION cannot simply be taken on trust; it harbours all manner of dubious elements. Hyndman, who sets himself up as a party leader *in partibus infidelium,*;[2] is a pretty unscrupulous careerist, and only a few years ago stood unsuccessfully as a Conservative candidate for Parliament[3] moreover, he treated Marx very shabbily. I will have nothing whatever to do with the DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION, a handy excuse being want of time, and am on closer terms only with *To-Day,* more notably Bax. The latter is a very good chap, save only that he is most unseasonably swotting up on Kant. If you have no objection, I shall publish in *To-Day* an English version of the letter Marx wrote to you about Henry George.[4] Then you will be able to make further use of it over there.

I shall hardly have time to enter into a debate with Stiebeling.[5] Such little tin gods can safely be left to their own devices. In any case, it will be years before anything can be done to inhibit sectarianism in America. Thus the great Most will, no doubt, eventually end up as Karl Heinzen II. I get the *Wochen-Volkszeitung,*[6] but there's not much in it.

What the position is as regards Bebel's, Liebknecht's or anyone else's going to America, I don't know.[7] When they asked me, I told the chaps that it probably wouldn't do to go tapping America for election funds every third year. In Germany, by the way, the position is very good. Our lads are conducting themselves really splendidly. Everywhere the Anti-Socialist Law is involving them in local struggles with the police, to the accompaniment of all manner of jokes and dirty tricks, struggles which usually turn out in our favour and are a source of the best propaganda in the world. Every now and again one or other of the bourgeois papers vents a sigh about the enormous progress made by our people, and they all of them dread the coming elections.[8] A fortnight ago one of my nephews from Barmen was over here — a liberal conservative. 'In Germany,' I told him, 'we have got to the stage when we can sit with our hands in our laps and let our opponents do the work for us. No matter whether you repeal, renew, tighten up or moderate the Anti-Socialist Law, whatever you do plays into our hands.' 'Yes,' said he, 'it is remarkable how circumstances are working for you.' 'To be sure they are,' I said, 'but they wouldn't be if we hadn't diagnosed them aright forty years ago, and acted accordingly.' No reply.

In France, too, things have been going better since Lafargue, Guesde and Dormoy were released from prison. They are very active, spend much time in the provinces where, luckily, their chief strength lies, possess little news-sheets in Rheims and St Pierre-les-Calais,[9] and will be holding a congress at Roubaix in a month's time.[10] Every Sunday, what is more, they give a very well-attended lecture in Paris, when Lafargue speaks on the materialist view of history, and Deville on *Capital.* I shall write and ask them to send you the things, all of which are printed. It's fortunate that they haven't got a daily in Paris just now, since it's much too early for that. A new edition of *The Poverty of Philosophy* is coming out in Paris.[11]

Likewise a German one in Zurich and a Russian in Geneva. I don't believe I have yet sent you a copy of my *Entwicklung,* never having received more than one or two myself. (The oafs!) Now the thing has come out in a 3rd edition, as well as in French, Italian, Russian and Polish. Aveling wishes to translate it into English.[12] He, too, is an admirable young man, but he has TOO MANY IRONS IN THE FIRE and is currently engaged in time-consuming strife with his former friend Bradlaugh; the socialist movement here is cutting the ground from under the latter's feet — and with it his livelihood. That means he must fight for it, but it isn't easy for that narrow-minded and rascally fellow.

So far, all is well with Tussy who generally comes here on Sundays. Lenchen is, as you know, keeping house for me. In a fortnight's time I shall be able to settle down in real earnest to Volume II of *Capital* — another huge task, but I look forward to it.

You should read Morgan (Lewis H.), *Ancient Society,* published in America in 1877. A masterly exposé of primitive times and their communism. Rediscovered Marx's theory of history all on his own, and concludes by drawing communist inferences in regard to the present day.

Kindest regards to Adolf.[13]

Your

F. E.