---
id: MECW47-050
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, January 28, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "28 January 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Book I, Moscow, 1924 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 28 January 1884

Dear Bernstein,

You will have got my letter of the 1st, as will Kautsky that of the 9th.[1] I am in some doubt about the latter, being unsure of the number of the house (38?); I also sent him the photographs he wanted.[2]

My inquiry today concerns the following: Various things among Marx's papers will be suitable for the party archives; just now I am in process of sorting his books, etc., and am glad to be again in a condition to do so. Besides these, however, there is a good deal of superfluous stuff which would be very useful to an editorial library for the party organ[3] and is superfluous here, as we have *in duplo.*[4] Firstly dictionaries: 1) the big French-German Mozin-Peschier, 5 volumes quarto, binding very dilapidated, 2) the old Italian Jagemann, also very good, 3) Spanish, Dutch, Danish, perhaps even more. I can't yet be sure whether Tussy might not want to keep one thing or another; if not shall I send them to Zurich with the remainder? Besides these, one thing or another will continue to turn up and could be offered to you, once I know that you are interested.

Further, as regards *Justice.* This paper has suddenly been launched upon the world by Hyndman with insufficient financial and absolutely *no* literary preparation. *To-Day* might survive and within 6 to 12 months pave the way for a weekly. But as it is the two of them are bound to sap each other's strength. Hyndman, however, cannot wait and will probably burn his fingers yet again. They have asked me to contribute, but I refused on the grounds of lack of time. One can send stuff to *To-Day* without hesitation; but this won't do in the case of a weekly purporting to be a party organ until one knows the whys and wherefores. It is apparent from the complete dearth of ideas in the first two numbers that the chaps are at their wits' end and are looking to new contributors for further material. In short it has misfired and only an unexpectedly favourable turn of events can put it on its feet.

In case Mr von der Mark or anyone else should again speak of our 'concessions' to the anarchists,[5] the following passages prove that we had proclaimed the cessation [Aufhören] of the state before the anarchists even existed: *Misère de la philosophie,* page 177:

*"La classe laborieuse substituera, dans son développement, à l'ancienne société civile une association qui excluera les classes et leur antagonisme, et il n'y aura plus de pouvoir politique proprement dit, puisque le pouvoir politique est précisément le résumé officiel de l'antagonisme dans la société civile."*[6]

*Manifesto,* end of Section II: 'When, in the course of development, class distinctions have disappeared... the public power will lose its political character. Political power, properly so called, is merely the organised power of one class for oppressing another.*[7] *

The last issue of the *Sozialdemokrat* was again very good. Cheerful and plenty of meat in it. Admittedly this last does not always depend upon the editors. Your rendering of Lafargue is truly delightful; the German substitutions cheered me up enormously.[8]

Regards to Kautsky.

Yours,

F.E.