---
id: MECW47-243
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, February 25, 1886"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 February 1886"
year: 1886
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Ensels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, 25 February 1886

Dear Liebknecht,

It's really quite impossible to do anything about getting your Russian speech[1] published in this country for, as you know, the *big* newspapers are barred to us and the monthly *Commonweal* is too small to take on that sort of thing. You will have to see to the matter yourselves, e. g. by getting in touch with the *Standard* correspondent as Longuet, for instance, did in Paris with Mother Crawford, the *Daily News* correspondent. Knowing that the Reichstag has no real say in anything, the British press very rarely mentions it, save for quite short telegrams. If you had not virtually confined yourself to Faerber's view of the harm suffered by German capitalists,[2] but had introduced the present eastern imbroglio[3] and blamed it on Bismarck as the man who, because of the loan, has the Russians eating out of his hand, your speech could not have been passed over in complete silence. But what you say about the worthlessness of Russian paper is common knowledge even in this country.

Now as regards those charming German literati who infest the neutral border zone between ourselves and the armchair[4] and state socialists, and want to pocket all the advantages to be derived from our party while carefully shielding themselves against any disadvantage arising out of intercourse with us— I've just had another demonstration of what shits the said literati are. An importunate fellow by the name of Max Quarck — *nomen est omen*[5] —wrote to me saying that Deville in Paris had given him *exclusive rights* to translate his abridgment of *Capital,* and asking me to recommend him to Meissner and write *a preface* for him.[6] It was all a lie, a fact of which I have received confirmation from Paris and as he himself informed Kautsky in a letter the *selfsame day.* And now the wretch has the effrontery to suggest that *I* should beg his pardon for *his* having lied to me! Just let him try that again, the scoundrel.[7]

You people will find you have competitors in France. The three working men, Basly, Boyer and Camélinat, since joined by Clovis Hugues, have set themselves up in the Chamber as a socialist labour group[8] in opposition to the Radicals,[9] and when, at a meeting last Sunday, the Radicals tried to inveigle the constituents into passing a vote of no confidence, they met with a resounding defeat — so much so that at the meeting they themselves had convened, the Radicals did not dare to open their mouths.[10] These three French working men will make more of an impact in Europe than your 25 because they sit in a Chamber which, unlike the Reichstag, is not a debating society, and because they have shaken themselves free of the milk-and-water petty-bourgeois following which hangs like a millstone round your necks. Clemenceau is now faced with a last crucial decision, but we can be almost sure that he will not hesitate to join the bourgeois camp, in which case, though he will indeed become a minister, he will be done for.

Your

F.E.