---
id: MECW47-012
title: "Letter to August Bebel, April 30, 1883"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "30 April 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published in: A. Bebel, *Aus meinem Leben,* Th. III, Stuttgart, 1914 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, 30 April 1883

Dear Bebel,

There is a very simple answer to your question as to whether I might remove to Germany or Switzerland or somewhere else on the Continent, namely that I shall not go to any country from which one can be expelled. But that is something one can only be safe from in England and America. I should at most go to the latter country on a visit, unless otherwise compelled. Hence I shall remain here.

Moreover England has another great advantage. Since the demise of the International there has been no labour movement whatsoever here, save as an appendage to the bourgeoisie, the radicals and for the pursuit of limited aims *within* the capitalist system. Thus, only here does one have the peace one needs if one is to go on with one's theoretical work. Everywhere else one would have had to take part in practical agitation and waste an enormous amount of time. As regards practical agitation, I should have achieved no more than anyone else; as regards theoretical work, I cannot yet see who could take the place of Marx and myself. What younger men have attempted in this line is worth little, indeed, for the most part less than nothing. Kautsky, the only one who applies himself to study, has to write for a living and for that reason if no other can achieve nothing. And now, in my sixty-third year, up to my eyes in my own work and with the prospect of a year's work on the second volume of *Capital* and another year's work on Marx's biography,[1] along with the history of the German socialist movement from 1843 to 1863 and of the International from 1864-72,[2] it would be madness for me to exchange my peaceful retreat here for some place where one would have to take part in meetings and newspaper battles, which alone would be enough to blur, as it necessarily must, the clarity of one's vision. To be sure, if things were as they were in 1848 and 1849, I would again take to the saddle if need arose. But now — strict division of labour. I must even withdraw as much as possible from the *Sozialdemokrat.* You have only to think of the enormous correspondence, formerly shared out between Marx and myself, which I have had to conduct on my own for over a year now. For after all, we wish to maintain intact, in so far as it is in my power, the many threads from all over the world which spontaneously converged upon Marx's study.

As regards a monument to Marx,[3] I do not know what ought to be done. The family is against it. The simple headstone made for his wife, which now also bears his and his little grandson's[4] names, would be desecrated in their eyes if replaced by a monument which, here in London, would be scarcely distinguishable from the pretentious philistine monuments surrounding it. A London cemetery of this kind looks quite different from a German one. The graves lie closely side by side, not room for a tree between them, and a monument is not allowed to exceed the length and breadth of the small plot that has been bought.

Liebknecht spoke of a complete edition of Marx's writings. All very well, but Dietz's plan for Volume II has made people forget that that Volume was long since promised to Meissner and that an edition of the other, shorter works would likewise have to be offered to Meissner first, and then could *only* appear *abroad.* After all, even *before* the Anti-Socialist Law it was always said that not even the *Communist Manifesto* could be printed in Germany save in the document read out at your trial.[5]

The manuscript of Volume II was completed prior to 1873, probably even prior to 1870.[6] It is written in German script; after 1873 Marx never used anything but Latin characters.

It is too late for registration, so this letter must go off as it is; however, I shall seal it with my seal.

A letter this evening to Liebknecht in Berlin.[7]

Your

F.E.