---
id: MECW47-036
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, November 8, 1883"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "8 November 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Book I, Moscow, 1924 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 8 November 1883

Dear Bernstein,

I have been keeping to my bed for the past few weeks in order to rid myself of a chronic ailment, mild in itself but tiresome and long neglected; I shall be up again in a few days. Hence my silence. Please accept my apologies and also convey them to Kautsky; I don't know whether he is still in Stuckert.[1]

The article on the right to work[2] was very good and very much *à propos.* Kautsky had already bombarded me about the same subject[3] and I shall be perfectly willing as soon as it becomes *necessary,* but I think one should first let these gentlemen compromise themselves a little more; they ought first to formulate more precisely what they mean by it; one must never stop people from giving 'complete and full' expression to their nonsense; only then does one get something really tangible. I hope your article will commit the chaps to this course.

If the Germans in Paris have not had their eyes opened to Malon & Co. *now,* there's no helping them. Their open alliance with the *traitors* of the English labour movement, the official representatives of the TRADES UNIONS, has earned them the applause of the entire English bourgeois press from *The Times* and *The Daily News* to *The Standard.*[4] A good thing that Guesde and Lafargue were doing time, thereby enabling this magnificent performance to be put on with no interruptions whatever!

Apropos. Do you know a Dr Moritz[5] Quarck (sic!) In Rudolstadt? This man, with whom I am totally unfamiliar, has referred me to a pamphlet,[6] with which I am equally unfamiliar, attacking one Fleischmann with whom I am even less familiar, and wants to translate *The Poverty of Philosophy* into German. I have my misgivings.

Well, let me know sometime soon what is going on in the world. I have become so stupid, lolling about in bed, that I can no longer marshal my thoughts.

Yours,

F. E.