---
id: MECW47-232
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, January 29, 1886"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 January 1886"
year: 1886
publication: "First published abridged in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A.an F.A.Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and En"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 29 January 1886

Dear Sorge,

At last I have some time to spare and hence shall hasten to write to you before anything else comes to claim it.

I hope your Adolf[1] has made a success of his new business. For he understands it and is a hard worker; besides, it's not a particularly speculative business — a great danger, in America as here — so I don't see why all should not be well. I therefore wish him every success.

I should *greatly* like to have Marx's comments re an English translation.[2] At last I have with me, here under my roof, the *complete* ms. of the English translation upon which I shall set to work next week. As soon as I know approximately how long the revision is going to take, and can thus determine the date when printing may begin, I shall make definite arrangements with the publisher. You will have seen (in *To-Day)* how Mr Hyndman, alias Broadhouse, endeavoured to put a spoke in my wheel.[3] This has forced me to get a move-on so as not further to impair my position vis-à-vis the publisher, but otherwise no harm has been done.

An American woman[4] has translated my book on the working class[5] into English, and has also sent me the ms. for revision — parts of which will be very time-consuming. Its publication in America is assured, but what this lady sees in the old thing I cannot imagine.

I further have in hand — to mention only revisions: 1) *The Eighteenth Brumaire,*[6] French — about *1/3* already done. 2) *Wage Labour and Capital* by Marx — Italian. 3) *The Origin of the Family* — Danish. 4) *Manifesto*[7] and *Socialism: Utopian and Scientific,* etc., Danish; these two already in print but stiff with mistakes. 5) *The Origin of the Family,* French.[8] 6) *Socialism: Utopian and Scientific,* English.[9]

PLENTY MORE LOOMING IN THE DISTANCE. As you can see, I'm turning into a mere schoolmaster correcting exercise-books. It's lucky that my knowledge of languages is not more extensive, for if it were, they'd be piling Russian, Polish, Swedish, etc., stuff on to me as well. But it is work of which one easily tires — in any case all these nice little bits and pieces (at any rate Nos. 2 to 5) will have to give way before Volume III of *Capital* which I have finished dictating from the ms., though the editing of some of the most important chapters will involve a *great* deal of work, these consisting in little more than an assemblage of building blocks. That is the only task to which I look forward.

I have *not* yet had the *New Yorker Volkszeitung.* I shall, if possible, send off *To-Day,* September, by the same post as this. You've no idea how difficult these things are to get hold of here — the slovenliness of the publishers is quite disgraceful.

If you haven't yet seen it, get Dietzgen to give you Hubert Bland's piece on Hyndman's simultaneous machinations with the Tories and Liberals over the elections.[10] It is absolutely true. After this, and provided it doesn't disintegrate, the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION[11] will be morally defunct. Hyndman must be mad to act as he does. You will have read all about his insane attack on Aveling, and will also have seen the relevant documents in *Justice* and *Commonweal.*[12]

Unfortunately, none of the other leaders of the FEDERATION are worth much more than he, being literati and political speculators. Indeed, the movement in this country has hitherto been quite bogus, but should it prove possible to educate within the SOCIALIST LEAGUE[13] a nucleus with an understanding of theoretical matters, considerable progress will have been made towards the eruption, which cannot be long in coming, of a genuine mass movement.

Give my regards to Dietzgen. It's uphill work for him, but he'll manage all right.[14] AFTER ALL, the movement in America has made tremendous strides. True, the Anglo-Americans want to do things their *own* way with a total disregard for reason and science, nor could one expect anything else, yet they are drawing closer and will end up by coming all the way. Over there capitalist centralisation is going ahead like a house on fire — unlike here.

I trust your health is completely restored. I'm pretty well on the whole, otherwise I should never get through my work.

I've been working on Bebel with a view to his visiting the States with Liebknecht.[15] Tussy and Aveling might go too. But that remains to be decided.

My kindest regards to Adolf.

Your

F. Engels