---
id: MECW47-034
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, October 3, 1883"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 October 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 3 October 1883

My dear Laura,

Herewith cheque for £14.- of which £4.- are your 1/3 share of £12.- sent by Meissner on account of 2nd edition [of] *Kapital,*[1]

£4.- for Tussy and £4.- for Longuets children, which Tussy has banked for the present until a little more money accrues to them, when we can consider, along with you, what is to be done in their interest.

Jollymeier left here yesterday, highly enchanted with Paris. He says you will come over at Christmas — hope it will turn out true!

Today I sent to you, registered, pages 1-123 of Deville's ms.[2]

I cannot find his letter with his address. The defect of the thing is that many parts of it have been done rather too hurriedly. This is princi- pally the case with the descriptive portions (especially *manufacture* and *grande industrie").* The points do not at all come out as they ought to do. It is not sufficient to express them, as much as possible, in Marx's own words; these cannot be torn from the context without giving rise to misinterpretation or leaving many things in comparative obscu- rity. Deville would do well to revise these two chapters throughout and to complete them by some of the exemplifications of the original without which they have become very abstract and to working- men-readers obscure. In the theoretical parts there are also many slight inaccuracies (some too, as his definition of *marchandise*[3] very serious) and *des choses faites à la hâte,*[4] but these it was mostly not very difficult to set more or less right. Then many portions, of interest and importance for theoretical economic science, but without immediate *portée*[5] on the question between capital and labour, might be omitted. One or two I have indicated.

Now then I close. Though a good deal better I am ordered to lie down as much as possible quietly for a few days longer and so with kind regards to the prisoners and sincere love from Nim and myself remain

Ever yours affectionately,

F. Engels