---
id: MECW47-270
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, August 6, 1886"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 August 1886"
year: 1886
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN D E A L

London, 6 August 1886

Dear Kautsky,

We leave tomorrow for Eastbourne. Address 4 Cavendish Place, as before.

Have just booked a passage for Liebknecht on the Cunard STEAMER *Servia* and sent him the receipt.[1]

You will find your MONEY ORDER here in an addressed envelope. Also sundry American *Sozialists* for yourself and sundry American *Volks-Zeitungs* along with the *Missouri Republican* containing the outrageous interview — please keep these *Volkszeitungs* and the *Republican* for me.

Will you please — when you get back — continue to forward my letters, etc., at regular intervals, i.e. *at most* every other day, but as a rule twice a week, just as you did before?

The translation of the ms.[2] was finally completed yesterday; 23 sheets have been set up and the proofs are in hand.

Liebknecht is sailing from Liverpool on 4 September, the Avelings on 31 August.[3] We shall be staying here until 28 August for certain and if possible a week longer; it depends on Liebknecht's arrival and other possible visitors.

You will have read about the sentences in Freiberg[4] — 6 months for Dietz, Heinzel and Müller, 9 for the others.[5] Typically German.

Thank you for your news from Vienna. Otherwise all is tranquil while the world takes a breather, the one exception being the Russians who are surreptitiously intriguing away for all they are worth. Giers evidently intends to wangle something worthwhile out of Bismarck this year, but I don't imagine he will succeed.

Kindest regards to your wife.

Your

F.E.