---
id: MECW47-075
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, April 18, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "18 April 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: *F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 18 April 1884

My dear Laura,

Best thanks for your news about the children[1] which were very grateful to all of us. Will hope the new arrangement may work at least for some time and without too much friction, though she[2] looks, from what you say, a rough subject enough to create any amount of that.

As to our 'Socialist' group here, I too am of opinion and said so, that Bax and Aveling are the only ones worth having, they at least study with a will, though not always a well directed one. But the worst is, this little clique *of public* 'mutual admirators' and at least partially *secret* 'mutual detractors' (especially Hyndman) are getting a regular nuisance through their mischievous gossip. First we hear from Sam Moore that he has heard in Manchester that Hyndman was busy translating the *Kapital.* This mystery we have as yet not been able to sift thoroughly but it will probably turn out a *canard.* Now, before we are well over that, those two busybodies in Paris[3] spread the report that Aveling was at it! The long and the short of this is as follows. Aveling, who studies the German text, has translated a few pages for his own benefit. When Hyndman was named as a possible competitor in the field, Sam at the same time declared that his own translation was getting on very slow, and he would be glad of some help. So Aveling was mentioned; I looked over his work and found it utterly useless. He was however very eager, and so, on his meeting Sam Moore here last week, it was arranged that he should try his hand at the chapter 'Der Arbeitstag',[4] this being chiefly descriptive and free, comparatively, from difficult theoretical passages for which Aveling is totally unfit *as yet,* that is to say until he has worked himself through the whole book and understands it. But at the same time I said to Sam that I made it a condition that you should be asked also to take a share in the work, of which Sam was very glad, and now I come to ask you to choose one. The matter stands at present as follows:

Sam is now doing the 1st *Abschnitt*[5] from the beginning, we have gone over part of his 1st chapter and it is very good, though we shall revise it again. He intends going on to the end, page 127 (2nd edition) and the most difficult parts (p. 22-44) we shall each do independently and then compare.— From p. 128 to 221 (2nd *Abschnitt* and 3rd *Abschnitt,* chapters 5, 6 and 7) all is completed. Chapter 8th we will let Aveling try. All the rest is open to you to choose from. I do not think you will like to take the next 4th *Abschnitt, Kooperation, Teilung der Arbeit..., Maschinerie etc.*[6] p. 318-529, this being rather technical, and so is the 6th *Abschnitt: der Arbeitslohn*[7] The 7th: *die Akkumulation*[8] I should suppose, would suit you best. But choose for yourself. Any technical terms for which it might be difficult to find the English equivalent in Paris, you might leave room for, we could hunt them up here or in Manchester and fill them in. As all parts of the translation pass through my hands, I can easily restore the unity of expression (the application of the same technical terms throughout the book). If you accept our proposal, as I hope you will, and choose a section for yourself, we shall have fulfilled at least partially Mohr's wish and have your name and your work associated with this translation which I am convinced more and more every day is an absolute necessity, if the present movement here is not to collapse like a pricked ball by its own inanity; and we shall also be able to hasten the publication. Tussy has undertaken to hunt up all the quotations from Blue Books and to transcribe the original passages so as to avoid retranslation and errors unavoidably connected with it. She will also see Kegan Paul as soon as possible, may be to-day (the Easter holidays stopped action in that direction), and arrange an interview for me with him when we hope we may be able to settle business matters; we shall then also know whether there is any truth in the Hyndman report.

So if you do say yes, at least something good will have to be connected with the gossiping reports of Bax and Joynes; for to tell you the truth I have no great faith in Aveling's *present* attempts.

Of Mohr's photographs there are about 450 small ones *(cartes)*[9] 24/-per 100 and 250 large ones (cabinets) 50/-per 100 cost price. I shall send you a good parcel of them if you like as soon as I shall have time to pack them. At present I have still heaps of books to stow away. Sam left on Wednesday, Schorlemmer is still here till Monday. He sends kindest regards by the million.

The copy [of the] 3rd edition[10] I sent to Danielson direct on 5th April, *registered,* and should be glad if Paul would mention this in his next letter to him. Lopatine had asked me to send it and given me the address.

Now I shall have to write to Paul. So until next time I remain

Your very affectionate

F. Engels