---
id: MECW47-143
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, January 1, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "1 January 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 1 January 1885

My dear Laura,

In all haste a few lines. Moore and Jollymeyer are off to Tussy's and so I have profited of the occasion to shake off a lot of business let- ters— a few moments remain before 5.30.

I had paid for your *Justice* up to 31 December, but as I had no proper receipt, could not do much — besides every letter of mine to anybody at that office was followed by an application from them for an article of mine, so that I really could not write to them even on business. However Edward says he pays to the Modern Press and so I have sent the money today for both you and myself for 6 months' *Justice* and *To-Day* and hope you will get it. What we can get of back numbers you shall also have, but there is not much in it worth your notice, the leaning towards the Possibilists is of quite recent date and not at all pronounced, except last No. [with] a letter from Adolphe Smith. Now however it's sure to bloom out.

Last night we were at Pumps', she is uncommonly well but over- does it a little — the baby all right.

I am sorry the crisis in the Social Democratic Federation[1] could not be retarded a little longer; Hyndman would have got deeper into the mud, and the personal element would have been thrown more into the background. However it could not be helped. The reason why the majority, instead of following up their victory, *resigned,* and starts a new organisation[2] was this chiefly, as Morris said to me:

that the old organisation was not *worth having.* The London branches are about 300 strong in all and those they hope mostly to get, and as to the provinces, it's all bosh and bogus.

Well we'll see what they will make. There is this to be said in their favour: that three more unpractical men for a political organisation than Aveling, Bax and Morris are not to be found in all England. But they are sincere.

Again Happy New Year to both of you and to the poor little ones[3] at Argenteuil when you see them, from Nim and myself.

Your

F.E.