---
id: MECW47-277
title: "Letter to Hermann Schluter, August 20, 1886"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "20 August 1886"
year: 1886
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

Eastbourne, 20 August 1886
4 Cavendish Place

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Now it's your turn at last. I had to give up writing letters until the English ms.[1] had been finished.

Firstly, therefore, your letter of 10 March.

1) Funds received at last. Receipt made out in duplicate.[2]

2) Have read Lexis.[3] The man is far from stupid, but he's an out- and-out rascal and knows it.

3) *The Origin*[4] —Dietz's way of going about things gave me fresh proof of how arbitrarily he behaves in business matters and I shall be guided by this in future dealings with him. Apart from that, the outcome has been satisfactory and has enabled the thing to reappear in the bookshops.[5]

4) General Council's Addresses. Whether I have them all I shall only know when my friends give me sufficient time to put Marx's letters, etc., in order. So until then I shan't be able to help you.[6]

5) Chartist ms.[7] will be finished as soon as I get back to London *after the 28th.*[8] I shall probably have a chance to consult our old friend Harney about doubtful points; he is sure to be in London now. The article in the *Rheinische Jahrbücher* is by Weerth and you may name him.[9]

Postcard of 8/6.— You might send me the letters from the late Heß' papers when convenient, though they're unlikely to amount to more than tittle-tattle. After 1848 the good Moses ceased to be connected with any real movement and merely did a bit of Lassalling for a time under Schweitzer.

Letter 16/8.— I shall be glad to look over *The Housing Question;* the thing can be reprinted pretty well as it stands (so far as I am able to judge from memory). A word or two will be necessary by way of introduction.[10]

A re-issue of the *Mordspatrioten* would certainly be a very good idea. The thing is by Borkheim and I would write a short biographical note[11] to go with it. But as I have only one copy, likewise of *The Housing Question,* and as both of them will probably call for notes, I should be grateful if you would send me one copy of each (to London).

Would you kindly give the enclosed line to Ede.

Yours,

F. Engels