---
id: MECW47-037
title: "Letter to Vera Zasulich, November 13, 1883"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 November 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Gruppa 'Osvobozhdeniye truda',* No. 1, Moscow, 1924 Printed according to the original Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO VERA ZASULICH

IN GENEVA

London, 13 November 1883 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Citizen,

I am not really in a position to answer the questions you have been so good as to put to me.[1] The publication of the second volume of *Capital* in the original text, continues to be delayed. Up till now I have had to confine my attention mainly to the 3rd edition of the first volume.

So far I have heard nothing at all from St Petersburg in regard to a Russian translation of the 2nd volume. Nor, for that matter, do I believe that, as things are now, there could be any question of publishing a work of this kind in the Russian capital; no doubt they would first want to take a look at the German text.

On the other hand, the political situation in Russia is now so tense that a crisis might supervene any day. I even think it probable that the press will be free in Russia before it becomes so in Germany. And in that case the translator of the first volume, TepMaHT. Aona- THHT),[2] could, with some reason, claim the right to translate the second.

I do not, therefore, believe that the time is yet ripe for an attempt to arrive at a final decision on this matter, but must thank you sincerely for your kind offer which I shall bear in mind. Perhaps we shall be able to see things more clearly in a month or two, and then we can renew our discussion on the subject.

It pleases me very much to hear that it is you who have undertaken to translate my *Entwicklung etc.*;[3] I look forward eagerly to seeing your work and fully appreciate the honour you have done me.

I am, my dear and courageous citizen,

Yours ever,

F. Engels

To Citizen Vera Zasulich