---
id: MECW47-174
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, June 3, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 June 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the original "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 3 June 1885

Dear Sorge,

I was sorry to hear that you have been incapable of writing and trust that the thing has subsided. The Gronlunds and Elys,[1] as also the newspapers, gratefully received. Ely is a well-meaning philistine and does at least take more trouble than his German fellow-sufferers and fellow-blockheads which, after all, deserves recognition. Gronlund, on the other hand, strikes me as being speculative: his boosting of our stuff, in so far as he does or does not understand it, is clearly aimed at palming off his own Utopian fiddle-faddle as REAL LIVE GERMAN SOCIALISM. A symptom at any rate.

As regards *To-Days* and *Commonweals,* I am sending you the former from March onwards and the latter from the beginning.[2]

However their administrative side is not particularly efficient; should the paper *[The Commonweal]* fail to reach the *Sozialist* regularly, I should be *very grateful* if you would advise me so that I can provide *proof* of inefficiency, this being invariably denied by the secretary, though it undoubtedly exists.

You would do best to ignore Fabian completely; the man feels a need to get himself talked about and there is no necessity to encourage that.[3] His chief grievance against me is that I maliciously defamed V — 1 in the *Anti-Dühring,* a point on which he complained to Marx by letter. 209

You have had the same correct presentiment about the Reichstag laddies as I have — the case of the Steamship Subsidies[4] has revealed the immensity of their philistine aspirations. It almost came to a split, which would not be desirable at present, so long as the Anti-Socialist Law 37 remains in force. As soon as we get a bit more ELBOW-ROOM in Germany, the split will doubtless come and can then only do good. A petty-bourgeois-socialist parliamentary group is inevitable in a country like Germany where philistinism, even more than historical right, 'doesn't have no date'. 4 0 8 It will also be useful once it has constituted itself a body separate from the proletarian party. However such a split could only do harm just now if it were provoked by *us.* But if they do in fact renounce the programme, so much the better; we shall then be able to let fly.

You in America also suffer from various great savants of the kind possessed by Germany's philistine socialists in the persons of Geiser, Frohme, Bios, etc. The historical digressions in the *Sozialist* by your Stiebelings, Douais, etc., on the subject of Völkerwanderung[5] amused me greatly, for these people have studied the whole thing far better and far more thoroughly than I have. Douai, in particular, gives himself colossal airs. For instance in No. 13 of the *Sozialist,* apropos the German conquests in Italy, etc., he tells us that the King acquired ⅓ of the land and the officers and soldiers ⅔, of which ⅔ passed in turn to the former slaves, etc. **This we learn from Jornandes and Cassiodorus.'* 40Q When I read that I was completely bowled over. ****Precisely similar accounts,** he goes on, **are provided about the Visigoths. Nor was it otherwise* in France.' Well, the whole thing is an invention from start to finish and you *won't find a word of it either in Jornandes or in Cassiodorus or in any other contemporary source.* It reveals at once colossal ignorance and impudence to confront me with such utter rubbish and to say that I am 'demonstrably in the wrong'. The sources, and I know practically all of them, state precisely the opposite. I have let it pass this time, as it was written in America where one can hardly make an issue of that kind of thing. But Monsieur Douai had better watch out in future; I might well lose patience some day.

The 2nd volume of *Capital* will be out shortly; all I am awaiting is the last half proof-sheet of the preface where Rodbertus receives a further broadside. The 3rd book is going ahead merrily, but will take a long time. Not that that matters, as the 2nd volume must be digested first. The 2nd volume will cause great disappointment, being a purely scientific work with little in the way of agitation. By contrast the third volume will again have the effect of a thunderbolt, since the whole of capitalist production is dealt with in context for the first time and all official bourgeois economics rejected out of hand. But it will be quite a task. Since the New Year I have dictated more than half of the final version and expect to finish this preliminary work in about 4 months. But after that there will be the actual job of editing, which won't be easy as the most important chapters are in some disorder — so far as form is concerned. However everything will work out all right, though it will take time. As you can imagine, I shall have to leave everything else on one side until I have finished, and hence neglect my correspondence; nor can there be any question of writing articles. But you would oblige me if you would see to it that nothing of what I have said about the 3rd volume gets into the *Sozialist.* That would inevitably give rise to unpleasantnesses in Zurich and elsewhere. Whatever the readers need to know will appear in my preface to the 2nd volume.

All is well with Tussy so far. The two of them[6] are very happy together, though unfortunately they are not always in good health. Lafargue must now do another 4 months on account of the same old fine and costs.[7] The police were intent on fomenting a riot in Paris on 24 May, but nothing came of it and the ministers took fright.[8] So the Victor Hugo business went off quietly after all, and that is just as well. As there is no Garde Nationale, no weapons are to be had and any attempted coup would inevitably be crushed. One just has to adapt one's tactics to the circumstances. Regards to Dietzgen and Adolf.[9]

Your

F. E.