---
id: MECW47-063
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, February 21, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "21 February 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Colle"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 21 February 1884

My dear Laura,

Your news about the children's[1] health is more or less reassuring — except poor Wolf[2] who, however, seems the strongest of the lot and, we hope, will have got over the worst when you next give us some news.

As to what is to be done in case anything happens to Longuet, well, that will have to be considered if that event should occur; I do not see what much should be gained if we 'speculated' on that now — I mean speculating in the philosophical sense — at any rate I do not see either what we can do under present circumstances with such a pa- ternal father as Longuet, but if you do, I shall be most happy to hear from you on the subject.

We have arranged with Gittens about packing and forwarding the books, etc., for you and Lavroff and as they have not come for them for two days, Nim has gone to stir them up.

Herewith the preface to the *Misere* by — Mohr himself! ' 5 ' Bern- stein has re-discovered this old article which I have at once translat- ed. Please, you and Paul, to turn my translation into proper French and return it along with the original which belongs to the *Partei- Archiv* 144 at Zurich. There will only a few more words be required. But what will the French public say to the rather unceremonious manner in which Mohr speaks of them? And will it be wise to have this true and impartial judgment at the risk that the Brousses say: *voilà le Prussien*?[3] Anyhow, I should be very loth to soften the article down to suit *le gout parisien*[4] but it is worth considering. There is no denying that the *bas empire*[5] has been there for 18 years.

Paul's *bon dieu*;[6] is charming, so is the introduction to his *confér- ence.* ' 7 9 The *exposé* too is quite taking for his public and I am not as- tonished at his success. But he might now and then give them a *new* il- lustration from the *Kapital* besides the old quotation of Liebig about the size of recruits[7] and not treat 1) *la concurrence* and 2) *l'offre et la demande?*[8] which is but *la concurrence* over again. If I am strict with him, it's because I see it does him good and he improves considerably by hammering a bit now and then; his last performances certainly show great progress, and if he would only be a little more attentive to certain theoretical points (mostly of detail) he would be a great light in Paris, *ville-lumière*[9] as it is.

Now I must conclude. Nim has come back and we must make up book-packets for Russia and America, in time for registering. She says Gittens cannot come before Tuesday or Wednesday[10] —so she sends you a kiss, I the same, and *une bonne poignée de main*[11] to Paul

From your affectionate

F. Engels