---
id: MECW47-183
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, July 4, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 July 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 4 July 1885

My dear Laura,

Herewith the cheque £ 15.- as desired by Paul who I hope does not suffer too much from the heat which ought to be rather trying in Ste Pélagie[1] by this time.

Your adventure with the Russians vividly recalled to me the times when one was never sure that Dupont would not drop in about half past one in the morning with one or two *citoyens*[2] (something in a lightly elevated state) whom he then and there deposited for the night.

*Justice* announces, as you may have seen, that Reeves (a rather im- pecunious small man of Fleet St.) is going to publish a translation of Deville's extract of the *Capital* in 'numbers'. This is a dodge against our translation.[3] If it comes out I shall have to declare that Devil- le's extract is anything but faithful or rather too faithful in the second half, giving all the conclusions and leaving out most of the premises and all the qualifications.

Fortin of Beauvais sends me the beginning of his translation of *The 18th Brumaire.* I have not yet had time to look at it.

I have nearly done dictating of the 3rd volume[4] —what can be dictated. Then, after my return from the seaside (end of August)[5] comes first the sorting of the letters, etc. (and also of the books), and then the real work with the 3rd volume. Of the 2nd volume no news. If it does not come next week I shall write. These publishers always have some business pretext why a thing should not be brought out at once.

Mohr's trial at Cologne[6] is being reprinted in Zurich. Of the Russian translation [of] 2nd volume 18 sheets out of 33 are already done.[7]

Now I must go to town on urgent private affairs (cash), so no more today from

Yours ever affectionately,

F. Engels