---
id: MECW47-072
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, March 31, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "31 March 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 31 March 1884

My dear Laura,

Even if it had not been for Paul's letter this morning, this afternoon was set apart for a letter to you. I am so bothered and pestered just now that not only my time, but also my room and my desk are not my own. On Monday last[1] we got clear of 41 Maitland Park Road, paid Willis and gave him the key. What furniture there was left, is in Gittens' hands, they offered £ 12.10.- but advised a sale — we are trying to get £ 15.- out of them to have done with it; this will be attended to this week. Then I have been busy with the books, and was getting clear—two more days would have settled the heavy work — when lo! the landlord sends the painters to do the house outside, and here we are, three dawdling fellows in the house, all windows open, every room invaded at the most unexpected hours, and to crown all, a bleak east-wind blowing inside as well as outside. That I got as fine a specimen of rheumatism as could be wished for, was only natural. Fortunately, if the dawdlers keep possession of the house even now, the east-wind has left us and so has, more or less, the rheumatism; and I am promised possession of my room for to-day,— on condition of giving it up to-morrow. So let us enjoy the present while it lasts.

Nim says there is such a weight off her mind now since the old house is done with that she at last can sleep again, it was a nightmare for her which even an occasional nightcap of 'Irish' could not drive away. Our place has much changed, two of my book-cases have gone below, the piano is in the corner between the fire-place and folding door (in the front room), the other corner filled up by one of Mohr's book-cases, while his large book-case (that behind his sofa) now takes the place where the piano stood in the back room. As soon as the painters will have cleared out, I shall finish the sorting of the last heap of books, and then try and get off the last box of books, for you, there is a nice little lot of things relating to the French Revolution, Loustalot, *Feuille Villageoise, Prisons de Paris pendant la Révolution,* etc., etc.

I have settled with Meissner that the 2nd book[2] (*Zirkulationsprozess des Kapitals*) is to be published first separately; as soon as the *gross* work is finished, I can begin. The 3rd book will follow, along with *Theorien über den Mehrwert,*[3] a long critical work forming part of the *first* ms. of the *Kapital* (1862) which I have discovered. The English translation is going on slowly, Sam has too much law-work to attend to, and is too conscientious to hurry on with it, 'regardless of quality'.

The movement here is showing more and more of its emptiness every week. *Justice* drives me to despair by its utter incapacity of tackling even one single question. *To-Day* will live this next month entirely by Davitt and Paul who you will have been glad to learn from *Justice* is the first living authority on French peasant property. These fellows cannot even give a man his due without trying to make him look ridiculous. Bax and Aveling are the only two, as far as I can see at present, of whom something can be made; but Bax has Kant on the brain and Aveling in order to live, has to keep a good many irons in the fire and is a perfect novice in everything relating to political economy. Paul will no doubt see Bax at Roubaix; he and a workingman[4] have been delegated by the Democratic Federation, much against Hyndman's will who has lately made several attempts at forcing his personal plans and dodges upon them, but was ignominiously defeated: so he opposed sending delegates to Roubaix as he wanted to keep open the chance of a connexion with Brousse and Co. That fellow will not go far: he cannot bide his time.

I am afraid Paul will be disappointed with regard to a German delegate to Roubaix; unless Liebknecht does come; but as he has promised to do so, it is not likely. The others do not speak French, except perhaps Bernstein, and him the deputies are sure not to send, as they mostly hate him, and would replace him in Zurich if they could and dared. Thanks to the great accession of petit bourgeois — *gebildete Schafsköpfe*[5] our 'leaders' in Germany have become a sorry lot. Anyhow I hope Roubaix will be a great success *devant le public,*[6] it will help on enormously; in the meantime I enclose the cheque £ 10.- and send you plenty of kisses from Nim and your affectionate old cripple