---
id: MECW47-044
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, January 1, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "1 January 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Book I, Moscow, 1924 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 1 January 1884

Dear Bernstein,

First a Happy New Year to you, Kautsky and the whole newspaper office.[1]

Then a request to send me last week's *Sozialdemokrat.* It should have arrived on Saturday, 29 December, but hasn't reached me yet.

A fortnight ago I was at last able to get up again, have improved steadily and hope to be fit for work in a week's time. And a damned good thing too!

I trust you were not too much infuriated by the number of amendments I made to your ms. As I once said to Kautsky, while we cannot imitate Marx's style, our own ought to be such as not to be wholly out of keeping with Marx's. Provided you don't lose sight of this altogether, we may well produce a work that is presentable.

The note on American slavery[2] shall be done, and various others besides. I shall also be able to include a fair amount in the preface.

How true the passage on slavery was is still evident today: capitalist production in the cotton states is not prospering—through not having any *coolies,* Chinese or Indian, i. e. slaves disguised as free labour; whereas in Cuba, Mauritius, Réunion, etc., it flourishes in so far as, and only in so far as, it has coolies at its disposal.

As regards your earlier inquiry about the passage from *The Civil War in France* in the preface to the *Manifesto,* you will, no doubt, concur with the answer that is given in the original (*The Civil War,* pp. 19 ff.).[3] I am sending you a copy in case you have not got one there. It is simply a question of showing that the victorious proletariat must first reshape the old, bureaucratic, administratively centralised state machine before they can use it for their own purposes; whereas, since 1848, *all* bourgeois republicans, so long as they were in opposition, have heaped abuse on that machine but, no sooner in office, have taken it over intact and made use of it, partly against reaction but to an even greater extent against the proletariat. That the Commune's *unconscious* tendencies should, in *The Civil War,* have been credited to it as more or less deliberate plans was justifiable and perhaps even necessary in the circumstances. The Russians have very properly appended the passage from *The Civil War* to their translation of the *Manifesto.* If there hadn't been such a great rush over getting it out, we could have done this and one or two other things.

Apropos. You once spoke of Guesde's disreputable past, or something of the sort. I know absolutely nothing about that. Undoubtedly just a pack of lies on Malon's part, but I should be glad if you would enable me to clear the matter up.

I shall shortly be sending you one pound sterling from Schorlemmer for his subscription, the balance for party purposes. It's too late to take out a money order today.

At last things have got moving again in Russia. The affair of the sledge and the Tsar is most suspect,[4] that of Sudeikin, on the other hand, crystal clear.[5] We should like to send Alexander[6] a telegram wishing him 'a happy holiday'.

Has Tussy Marx sent you *To-Day* and the last numbers of *Progress?* If not I shall attend to this. These two are *completely divorced* from the TRADES UNIONS movement and are in fact run by a *very motley* society. Bax is very honest but still somewhat green, Aveling is good but has little time in which to familiarise himself with economics, a subject utterly foreign to him. Joynes is an unreliable chap (once a schoolmaster at the big doss house at Eton, travelled to Ireland with Henry George, was arrested with him and lost his post; is therefore looking around to see what's doing) and Hyndman, an ambitious party leader *in partibus infidelium,*[7] provisionally in search of a party and meanwhile issuing orders into the blue,—come to that a pretty shrewd fellow.[8] One's best course is to do justice to the aspirations without identifying oneself with the persons. At all events, the publication of *To-Day* and the transformation of *Progress* into a socialist journal is of great significance at this particular juncture, now that the poor in the East End OF London are beginning to find their voice. On top of that, all over the country we have chronic overproduction which now seems to be hastening on the crisis. Circumstances are favourable, but whether the people who have taken the matter in hand are a match for those circumstances remains to be seen. This time it's hardly likely to remain without a sequel, as have so many previous curtain-raisers.

Now *basta.* I haven't written a letter as long as this for the past three months. Schorlemmer and I send our cordial regards to all our friends.

Yours,

F.E.