---
id: MECW47-267
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, July 26, 1886"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "26 July 1886"
year: 1886
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN D E A L 5 9 4

London, 26 July 1886

Dear Baron,

I have today sent you a *Volkszeitung* and shall tomorrow send off the one that arrived today; also *Deutsche Worte,* wherein the first in- stalment of an article on Gustav Cohn 5 9 5—so far quite delightful. You really must get hold of the chap[1] for the *Neue £eit.*

Yesterday we were more or less on our own — Tussy was ill as well so that Aveling had to leave early — it's nothing much, but neverthe- less troublesome. On top ofthat it was raining cats and dogs — I hope you are having better weather down in the south-east where the cli- mate is more continental than anywhere else in England.

So Dilke has providentially gone into political exile — *requiescat in pace!*[2] That's what comes of protestant hypocrisy. None of this busi- ness could ever have happened in a Catholic country — either in Vienna or in Rome or in Paris — nor yet in Petersburg; such whited sepulchres are possible only in two centres — London and Berlin. In fact, if Berlin is becoming a metropolis, this is only because London is increasingly deteriorating into a Berlin. What could be more typical of Berlin than gallant Captain Forster escorting his lady-friend to a brothel? 396

No other news to speak of—Schorlemmer has gone to Germany; I am getting better every day. Nim has just finished reading *Märtyrer der Phantasie*[3] aloud (end has come!!) and is knitting stockings. Kind- est regards to you and your wife from us both.

Your

F.E.

If there should be anything you want doing at home, I have once more reached the stage at which I can perfectly well walk as far as that, and hope this will continue; so if I can do you any service, don't hesitate to let me know.