---
id: MECW47-045
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, January 9, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 January 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN ZURICH

London, 9 January 1884[1]

Dear Kautsky,

(Why must we continue to bore each other with 'Mr'?) The news about the coronation scenery is absolutely typical and has aroused much mirth; at the same time we have taken care that it does not leak out prematurely over here; i. e. before the scenery has been delivered and paid for. Not a soul knows about it apart from Schorlemmer, Lenchen and Tussy.

Many thanks for Frankel's address. So far as purely theoretical matters are concerned, Deville's summary[2] is the best that has yet appeared. He has understood everything aright, though his use of terminology has been very lax and this I have amended in the manuscript. On the other hand the descriptive part is treated far too cursorily, with the result that some of it is totally incomprehensible to anyone unfamiliar with the original. Again; what would make for much greater ease of comprehension, particularly in a popular account, namely the *historical* emergence of manufacture and large-scale industry as *consecutive historical periods,* is pushed much too much into the background. (We aren't even told that 'factory legislation' does not operate at all in France, but only in England!) And, finally, he gives a full summary of the entire contents, including stuff which Marx had had to bring in if his account of scientific developments was to be complete, but which is not necessary to an understanding of the theory of surplus value and its consequences (and this alone is what counts in the case of a popular summary). Similarly as regards the number of coins in circulation, etc.[3]

But then he also quotes verbatim from Marx's recapitulatory propositions, having given no more than an incomplete account of the assumptions upon which they were based. Consequently these propositions are frequently so distorted that in the course of my perusal I often found myself wanting to contest a proposition of Marx's, the limitations of which are made plain in the original by what goes before; in Deville, however, they are accorded absolutely universal, and hence false, validity. I can't change this without redoing the whole ms.

Now as to your translation of this,[4] my position vis-à-vis Meissner compels me to adopt an entirely neutral position. As soon as you write and tell me definitely that you will take the thing on, I propose, and I have already discussed this with Tussy who shares my view entirely, to act as follows: I shall write to Meissner saying that someone intends to publish Deville's piece (which I shall send Meissner) in German and that I can see nothing in this that might damage the sales *of Capital*—boost them, more likely; I shall then add that I cannot stop it but that, if he intends to take preventive action, he might let me know and I shall then pass this on.

Seen in the abstract (i.e. disregarding Meissner), a new popular and *short* account *[half* the size of Deville) of the theory of surplus value is much needed, and Deville's work is, so far as theory goes, far better than the rest. What should be dropped are 1) detailed references to the individual chapters and subsections of *Capital* and, 2) anything that is not necessary to an understanding of the theory of surplus value. This will involve rewriting the descriptive part from the beginning, and also considerable abridgement. It would allay the worst of Meissner's misgivings, especially if we changed the title to e. g. *Unpaid Labour and Its Transformation into Capital* or something of the kind.

At worst the thing could be printed by Dietz and published in Switzerland, like Bebel's *Frau.*[5]

So give the matter some thought and drop me a line. I enclose the two photographs[6] for you and Motteler. The business of the missing no. of the *Sozialdemokrat* has since been cleared up — the greatest success scored by Social Democracy to date is to have contrived *to put 53 weeks into a year,*[7] —a* real miracle. Just let them carry on like that and we'll all live two per cent longer.*

Kindest regards to Bernstein and yourself from

Yours,

F.E.

I had intended to enclose a one pound money order from Schorlemmer but it is now too late; must do so in my next. When does Tussy's and my subscription expire? Up till yesterday she had not received her *Sozialdemokrat* either. Might it have been forgotten? Kindly look into it.