---
id: MECW47-080
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, May 10, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 May 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* Vol. I, Paris, 1956 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 10 May 1884

My dear Lafargue,

Herewith cheque for £14. Since I do not see any of the Paris papers, it is only from *The Standard* and from yourself that I know what is going on; your electoral tactics are just what I myself would have recommended 2 ' 6 — these people will do themselves in if left to their own devices; GIVE THEM PLENTY OF ROPE AND THEY ARE SURE TO HANG THEMSELVES. However, Bernstein wrote and told me that you had put up a candidate[1] in opposition to Joffrin, and that he thought this ill-advised; let me know what the circumstances are so that I can answer him.

Thank you for the article — it is only the first one and I cannot now remember if I wrote the sequel.[2]

I have only seen the first number of Vaillant's translation. It is good and accurate, save that he does not always appear to be conversant with military terminology.

Your lectures and those of Deville are excellent ' 7 9 but, at least for the published version, you should develop more exhaustively the conclusions of your second one on Darwinism. That part seems overwhelmed by the mass of premisses leading up to the conclusion, nor is the latter self-evident enough, while its detail is inadequately developed. I have not yet read the third one. As soon as the translation of *The Poverty of Philosophy* has been completed in Zurich, ' ' 8 I shall suggest that they bring out the lectures in German.

I shall now withdraw, having a rather important piece of work to complete: *The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State,*[3] which I hope to have rid myself of by the end of next week. Until then I must soldier on.

Give Laura a kiss from me and from Nim, who also sends one to you.

Yours ever,

F.E.