---
id: MECW47-073
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, April 11, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 April 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN ZURICH

London, 11 April 1884

Dear Kautsky,

Have got yours and Ede's letter. I hope to be done with Morgan next week 174; cannot do much at the moment as Schorlemmer and Moore are here. This will be my last job for some time; it is no joke making a résumé of so meaty and ill-written a book. If Tussy can find the letter, I shall also include an assessment of Richard Wagner by Marx 2 0 7; what the connection is you must find out for yourselves.

Thereafter work will proceed uninterruptedly on Volume II[1] as well as on revisions of: 1) your *Poverty,* ' 1 8 2) notes and preface 169 to the French ditto, 165 3) revision of the English translation[2] which ought now to forge ahead. Besides that, 4), more *Diihring'**^20B***** and whatever else may be sent me from France for revision.**

Fabian has been going for me with a persistence he would be quick to drop if he knew how much entertainment we over here derive from it. Some years ago he had suggested that we should write for a period- ical to be founded by him and another great thinker,[3] and this on the basis of a philosophical programme they had laid down ready cut and dried and consisting in a crabbed and misconstrued fourth generation Kantianism. After that he went for my dialectical approach to math- ematics and complained to Marx that I had defamed *-J —1.*[4] And now the fun is beginning all over again. Let him roam the world arm in arm with von der Mark; he will not be read by me.

*The Condition of the Working-Class.* The last news / had about it from Liebknecht was that Freytag had told him that I was still bound by my contract with Wigand. You can't go by what Liebknecht *says,* and what he has done in this matter amounts to nil.[5] I shall write to Frey tag myself; it is the only thing to do. 3 9

However much Geiser may abuse the atheists, Bismarck certainly won't do him the favour of repealing the Anti-Socialist Law. 3 7

Whoever may have harboured any illusions on this point hitherto will doubtless now be rid of them, Bismarck having thrown in his last re- serve, that old jackass Lehmann, in order to preserve it. 2 ' °

How delicious that the parliamentary group should *have forbidden* Liebknecht to write for a paper.[6] 2 ' ' That beats the old Prussian cen- sorship. Well, if Liebknecht stands for that, things have come to a pretty pass.

Rodbertus,[7] etc., received, many thanks; will be returned next week. The relevant note in *Capital* is in the 2nd edition, p. 552[8] and will, in the 3rd edition, be considerably qualified by me in an ad- dendum; kindly attend to this.

You must now excuse me, as I still have to write to Ede.

Your

F.E.