---
id: MECW47-154
title: "Letter to Pyotr Lavrov, February 12, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 February 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Translated from the French Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works,"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN PARIS

London, 12 February 1885

My dear Lavrov,

I hasten to reply to your questions.[1] The item about the *Neue Rheinische Leitung. Revue,* edited by Karl Marx, Hamburg and London, 1850, is absolutely correct. It appeared in *Heft*[2] I-VI and was pub- lished by Schuberth in Hamburg. You yourself asked me a few months ago for information about the articles by Marx which ap- peared in the *Revue* on the subject of the February revolution and the events that followed it. ' 5 6 I possess only 3 of the instalments and have tried in vain to get hold of the complete set. The other facts provided by Groß are also correct, if memory serves me aright (Tussy has got my copy, so I can't compare it). Needless to say, I in no way agree with his silly strictures on Marx's theories. He was recommended to me by the Viennese socialists and, in reply to some biographical ques- tions he put to me, I gave him the facts.

The German translation of the *Poverty* contains just a few explana- tory notes by me,[3] but also an article written by Marx in 1865 on Proudhon and his speech of 1847 on free trade.

The 2nd volume of *Capital* is now being printed; yesterday I cor- rected the 4th sheet. The rest of the manuscript goes off from here in a fortnight's time. The 3rd volume will be the most important one, and I shall get to work on it as soon as the 2nd has been well and truly launched.— The English edition is dragging its feet, the two translators[4] being too busy with other matters to work at it with the proper ardour. It will be finished, I hope, come the sum- mer.[5]

I had already heard that you were having trouble with your eyes. Would it not be wise to give up working for a time so as not to tire your eyesight unduly? I find that, at our age, it is always best to tackle morbid symptoms when they first occur. Let's hope that you will be able to let me have better news before too long.

In the preface to the 2nd volume of *Capital,* I again revert to Rodbertus in order to show that the objections he raises against Marx result from his quite unbelievable ignorance of classical political economy.[6]

Yours ever,

F. Engels

(Ф_eд_oр_b Ф_eд_oр_bіч_b)[7]