---
id: MECW47-303
title: "Letter to Hermann Schluter, November 26, 1886"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "26 November 1886"
year: 1886
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow 1935 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 26 November 1886

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Very many thanks for your communication re J. Ph. Becker.[1] As to his moving to Zurich, that is a matter I would rather leave to you to deal with direct. You say that the need for it is perfectly obvious; to you in Zurich that may seem entirely right, but to me here in London, where I am less able to weigh up the pros and cons, the case looks different. And for that reason I cannot possibly persuade him to move, at the drop of a hat, to Zurich from Geneva to which, after forty years, he has grown accustomed, having become, so to speak, part and parcel of the place. Accordingly I have so far said not a word about the matter.

The English translation[2] is all but done and once I have paid off my most pressing debts in the shape of letters owed to correspondents, I shall at last be able to attend to the items in suspense reposing in my desk. In order of seniority these are as follows:

1) Italian translation of *Wage Labour and Capital*[3] 10 months old, 2) French ditto of the *18th Brumaire,* 8 months old, 3) your Chartist ms., 5 " 4) and 5) my *Housing Question,* etc., and the *Mordspatrioten.*[4] To these you have now added 6) and 7).

6) *Theory of Force.*[5] You are welcome to go ahead, but what do you mean by 'correspondingly altered'? The purely positive part amounts to no more than a few pages while the anti-Dühring polemic is itself positive and indispensable both factually and technically. However if you simply mean the deletion of individual passages having no particular relevance to the question of force and merely serving to link together the rest of the text, then I agree. This will amount to about 25 pages and is rather little. In my view the 2 chapters, Morality and Law: *Eternal Truths* and *Equality,* could be similarly revised and added on, since these also revolve round the materialist-economic view of history, in which case the whole could be entitled *On Law and Force in World History* or something of the kind.

7) *On Social Relations in Russia.*[6] If you reprint the little pamphlet as it stands I have no objection; a preface to it would mean my embarking on further Russian studies, for which I have absolutely no time; a preface *without* further studies would provide nothing new and would therefore best be omitted. The articles relating to it in the *Volksstaat* would also best be omitted. No. 3 was an attack on Lavrov who since then has given us no cause to bring up the old business again and, like the beginning of No. 4 (attacking Tkachov),[7] it contains nothing, save for one or two perhaps tolerable jokes, that could be of any interest today, let alone have any effect as propaganda.

If Ede is not wholly engrossed in the Eternal Feminine,[8] kindly tell him that in my view the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION[9] ought now to be handled somewhat differently. The stupidity of the government, the inaction of the working men's Radical Clubs vis-à-vis the enormous growth in the number of 'unemployed' and, finally, the wisdom of the SOCIALIST LEAGUE, whose constant preoccupation with its own rules and regulations leaves it time for nothing else, have provided the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION with so splendid a pitch that not even Hyndman & Co. have yet managed to queer it. The SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION is beginning to be something of a power, since the masses have absolutely no other organisation to which they can rally. The facts should therefore be recorded impartially, in particular the most important fact of all, namely that a genuinely socialist labour movement has come into being over here. But one must be very careful to draw a distinction between the masses and their temporary leaders and, in particular, make sure you don't identify yourselves with the latter in any way, for it is virtually certain that before very long these political adventurers will, with the impatience that is born of ambition, again commit the most appalling blunders. As soon as the movement has acquired substance, either it will keep these gentlemen in check or they will destroy themselves. Hitherto the irritation felt by the majority has simply taken the form of dull, unconscious dissatisfaction, but it is in this way that the ground has been prepared for sowing.

In America, *apart from New York,* the real movement is running ahead of the Germans. The Americans' real organisation is the KNIGHTS OF LABOR which is as muddle-headed as the masses themselves. But it is from this chaos that the movement will evolve, not from the German sections — the Germans, that is, who, for the past 20 years, have proved incapable of extracting from their theory what America needs.[10] But this is just the moment when the Germans might exert a very enlightening influence — if only they had learnt English!

Kindest regards to everyone.

Yours,

F. Engels