---
id: MECW47-111
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, August 22, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 August 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Book I, Moscow, 1924 Printed according to the original Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

[Worthing, 22 August 1884]

[...][1] index for *Capital* would be highly desirable.[2] But why not all at one go when the whole thing is done? That will be next year for sure, provided I don't collapse, of which there is no prospect at present. For your own information, *The History of Theory* has also been largely completed. The ms. of *A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy* of 1860-62 contains, as I think I showed you when you were here, approx. 500 quarto pages on *Theories of Surplus Value,* a great deal of which must, it is true, be deleted because it has since been rewritten, but there will still be enough of it.

In his *Schulze-Bastiat,* Lassalle cited Rodbertus in a connection that might in anyone else's case have earned him intense hostility, i.e. as the authority for and/or discoverer of a trifle. The *Briefe*[3] may, it is true, have contributed to the Rodbertus cult. But what has done so more than anything else is, firstly, the desire among non-communists to set alongside Marx a rival who is himself a non-communist and, secondly, those people's unscientific confusion. To all those who loiter on the state socialist fringes of our party, make sympathetic speeches but nevertheless want to avoid the hostility of the police, His Excellency Rodbertus is a godsend.

The move of the *Neue Zeit* to Hamburg may after all be only the prelude to its end.[4] Of course I know nothing about those presently in charge of the Hamburg office.

Last Tuesday[5] we had a revolution here in Worthing. A shop belonging to a Salvation Army fanatic was attacked and broken up; the man fired his revolver, wounding three people. Next day windows were smashed in the lock-up; that same evening 40 dragoons and 50 police moved in (the little place has about 10,000 inhabitants) to clear the streets, whereupon the good citizens, knowing themselves to be innocuous, refused to budge and in several instances received a merciless beating; now all is calm. Really, the tomfoolery one witnesses. *Both sides,* SALVATIONISTS and ANTI-SALVATIONISTS, *are secretly in the pay of the bourgeoisie.*

Your

F. E.