---
id: MECW47-182
title: "Letter to Hermann Schluter, July 1, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "1 July 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 1 July 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Herewith the preface to the *Trial.*[1] I have made a note of the other items. It is unlikely that I can do a preface[2] and notes for the *Communist Trial*[3] before the beginning of September. In July I shall not have a moment to spare and in August I must relax at the seaside for a while.

After which I shall also be able to tackle the *June Insurrection.*[4]

I should be *delighted* to see the *Schlesische Milliarde* republished. In addition, you should reprint my biographical note on Wolff from the *Neue Welt* (about 1873 I think), to which I should also do an introduction.[5]

I am still waiting for Volume II of *Capital.* I can't really do anything for you where Meissner is concerned; I have no right to meddle in these matters, and the chap is meticulous.[6]

There are still several hundred portraits of Marx available, in both sizes.

On the whole, everything is going quite well in Germany; our working men will see to it that everything turns out all right.

Yours sincerely,

F. E.

Please let me have clean sheets of the *Diihring*[7] so that I can draw up a list of printer's errors. I would also ask that in future you let me have 2 clean proofs, as is customary and, indeed, essential.

If you wish to call the things 'From the *Neue Rheinische Leitung',* Vols. I, II, etc., I am quite agreeable, of course.