---
id: MECW47-002
title: "Letter to Pyotr Lavrov, April 2, 1883"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "2 April 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN PARIS

London, 2 April 1883

My dear Lavrov,

I hasten to acknowledge receipt of your letter enclosing a postal order for 124.50 frs. I shall not be able to cash it until Wednesday[1] at the earliest, as tomorrow I have to examine the manuscripts left by Marx. On completion of the commission I shall announce the fact in the *Sozialdemokrat* of Zurich, and shall ask the editorial department to send you one or two copies of that particular number. It goes without saying that no mention will be made of Citizen Krantz's[2] name.

I have found the manuscript of the *Zirkulation des Kapitals*[3] and of the third book: *Die Gestaltungen des Gesammtprozesses*[4] — some 1,000 in-folio pages. So far it's impossible for me to say whether the manuscript as it stands is in a fit condition to go to press. In any case I shall have to copy it out as it is in rough draft. Tomorrow I shall at last have time enough to devote several hours to going through all the manuscripts that Moor has left us, in particular an outline of dialectics which he had always intended to do. But he always refrained from telling us how far his work had progressed, for he was aware that, once people realised something was ready, he would be pestered until he consented to its publication. All this is between you and me; I have no right to publish anything without Tussy who is my literary co-executrix.

We were all delighted and surprised to hear that our good, brave — to the point of madness — Lopatin had so happily regained his freedom. Let us hope that, while retaining his bravery, he has left his madness behind him in Russia. I hope to see him here one of these days. Please give him my warm regards.

Yours ever,

F. Engels