---
id: MECW47-231
title: "Letter to Edward R. Pease, January 27, 1886"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "27 January 1886"
year: 1886
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDWARD PEASE

IN LONDON

[Draft]

[London,] 27 January 1886

Dear Sir,

In answer to your kind note of yesterday I regret to say that my time is so entirely taken up by urgent work on hand, that I cannot possibly for at least a year to come undertake any fresh engagements whatever.

Having said this much, I need not enter upon other considerations which might stand in the way of my writing the article you desire. But I may state at all events that the party to which I belong, has no fixed ready-made proposals to submit. Our views as to the points of difference between a future, non-capitalistic society and that of to-day, are strict conclusions from existing historical facts and developments, and of no value—theoretical or practical — unless presented in connection with these facts and developments. The economical aspect of these points of difference I have tried to establish and to explain in my book *Herrn E.D. Umwälzung der Wissenschaft* 2nd ed. p. 253 to 271; reprinted in my pamphlet *Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus etc.* 3rd ed. p. 28-48.[1] Shorter I cannot possibly do even this partial abstract, where neither political nor non-economic social questions are even touched. To give you a résumé in 600 words is therefore a task utterly beyond my powers.

I am yours faithfully