---
id: MECW47-003
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, April 11, 1883"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 April 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in English in full in Marx-Enge"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 11 April 1883

My dear Laura,

I do indeed think, along with you, that Paul ought to go and see his mother and I have told him so many a time and many a year ago. As to the extra expense, that will not be much and I can soon find you that, if informed in time. Only, if things are as you describe, it will re- quire some considerable diplomacy on Paul's part, not to spoil his own game — that Christian sister of charity ought not to be made an enemy of 7—she is *always* there and Paul *not,* and if only her sus- picions are aroused, be sure she will never cease to beguile the old woman i«to a will as much in her favour as the law will permit. So that point I suppose is settled — you'll have to look after the execu- tion.

We all of us have had a hearty laugh at your account of the Argen- teuil adventures. 8 It is so like him[1] from beginning to end. To-day it is a week that Tussy sent him a very categorical letter: when is the boy[2] to come? Not a line in reply. // *est toujours en train de réfléchir.*[3]

Paul is sure of six months at least.^9 He was awfully funky about it when here, and amused Liebknecht out of all measure with his *horror carceris.*[4] But if he does not now start in earnest to learn German, I shall consider him to be nothing but *un enfant gâté.*[5] Imagine he writes to me that he *will* learn it—**comme vous le dites très bien* (!) *il pourra* (!) *devenir nécessaire que je le sache pour des traductions!**[6] As if the perfection of his own accomplishments, bright as they are, did not en- tirely depend on his reading certain German things, published and unpublished! He rejoices in the prospect of the 2nd volume [of] *Capi- tal* being published, but will he ever be able to read it?

If M-me Gendre will translate the *Manifest*[7] into French and let me revise the translation (it's no child's play, you know) I will write her a preface sufficient to explain the historical circumstances, etc. ' ° But as I know nothing much of the lady, I am bound to say at present: no revision, no preface. A *right* to stop any proceedings of hers in that di- rection I have not. This notabene is for Paul. So is this: What speech of Giffen he writes about I don't know, nor where it was published.

Pumps is still 'expectant', or was so at least last night. Percy's mother told him the other day that really he ought to be a little better informed in a case like that.

Jollymeyer is here for a few days. Since then (as some days before he left 10 days ago) we have every evening a bobby promenading be- fore the house, when I let Carlo out about 12. The imbeciles evidently think we are manufacturing dynamite, when in reality we are discuss- ing whisky.

Kind regards from him and myself to both of you.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels