---
id: MECW47-095
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, July 11, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 July 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN ZURICH

London, 11 July 1884

Dear Kautsky,

I trust Ede will get over his feverish attack; give him my regards and tell him that I, too, shall be drinking to his health.

To have let Auer have the Hamburg stuff is perfectly all right so far as I'm concerned. I suggested Bebel and Dietz merely because I had to tell the man to *whom* I intended to mention his name; needless to say this does not in any way restrict your freedom of action.

The matter of Dietz is becoming a bore. If he won't say either yes or no, then we can't go on waiting for him. My chief concern is that the thing;[1] should come out and, secondly, that it should not be instantly confiscated *en masse.* I. e. two things that are to be had simultaneously only in Switzerland. Printing in Austria should be considered only in *case of need;* 1) it would mean fresh delays and negotiations and 2) the thing would be banned *all the same,* you need be under no illusions as to that[2] and 3) not only could it be banned in Austria, but also seized (remember the Viennese affair you told me about last autumn). So do get something positive done at last.

There must still be something peculiar going on in the *Neue Zeit,* otherwise that wise man Schippel would certainly not have been allowed to talk of a 'Rodbertusian-Marxian theory', or of things that '*one* has come to recognise since Rodbertus'; and without editorial comment at that.[3] The Germans must have fallen low indeed if they have still not discovered that what Marx has in common with Rodbertus is nothing more than the *application égalitaire de la théorie ricardienne*[4] mentioned by Marx on p. 49 of the *Poverty*[5] and which has been a commonplace among English socialists since 1827! But that is very far from being surplus value as defined by Marx and applied by him to every aspect of the science of economics. Which is why the good English, and likewise Rodbertus, for all their borrowings from Ricardo, have made no headway at all in the matter of economics; the first advance in this field was made by Marx, who demolished all previous political economy.

Incidentally, if I am to tackle Rodbertus *properly,* I must have his piece of 1842,[6] *Zur Erkenntniss unsrer Zustände,* or whatever it is called. You quoted from it.[7] Could you let me have it for a day or two or, better still, buy it for me? To judge by some of the quotations, it would seem to be the best, because the first thing that he wrote, his later stuff being a mere rehash, hence increasingly flimsy.

Your

F.E.