---
id: MECW47-102
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, July 31, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "31 July 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published in *Die Briefe von Friedrich Engels an Eduard Bernstein,* Berlin, 1925 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

[London, July 1884][1]

[...][2] By way of self-sacrifice I looked through a few numbers of the *Neue Welt.* It was so deadly dull that it couldn't be done for long. As regards Mr Geiser, his 'erudition' is unassailable *there.* The very fact of a person's parading his erudition in a penny paper of this kind is proof enough that he has failed to take in anything at all. Even had he not invariably written cholera bamllus for bacillus, as though the word stemmed from *bacca* and not *baculus.* Besides, it's to be found in any Latin dictionary. The assertion that both materialism and ideal- ism are one-sided and must be synthesised in a higher entity[3] is a hoary one and ought not to worry you; again, that atheism merely expresses a negation is an argument we ourselves had already ad- vanced against the philosophers 40 years ago, only with the co- rollary that atheism, as the *mere* negation of, and referring only to, religion, would itself be nothing without it and is thus itself another religion. Typical of the-remaining erudition is an article by Bios on the Greek and German gods[4] in which alone I noted the following se- rious bloomers:

1. The *Epistolae obscurorum virorum* are said to be by Reuchlin. While they did originate from his entourage, he had less of a hand in them than Ulrich von Hütten.[5]

2. The Greek gods '*feast* on nectar and *quaff* ambrosia'!

3. 'Mead', alias 'Meed',[6] he explains in brackets, is 'beer', when every child knows that it is, and always has been, made, not with malt, but with honey.

4. Bios does not even know the names of the German gods; [he][7] gives them now in early Nordic, now in German. Alongside the early Nordic Odin whose German name (early Saxon Wodan, Old High German Wuotan) he doesn't know, we find the Old High German Ziu. Odin is also said to have a wife called Freia; but in early Nordic she is called Frigg, Old High German Fricka, something even Rich- ard Wagner could have told him. There you have a little nosegay culled rapidly in the space of 10 minutes! Not even the meanest cur could be frightened by erudition of *that* sort. Just let them strut like peacocks in their penny paper; you only have to look behind their fans to see where the droppings come from!

Your

F. E.

Regards to Karl Kautsky.