---
id: MECW47-157
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, March 8, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "8 March 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 8 March 1885

My dear Laura,

Somehow or other I have to-night a few free moments and so sjt down to write to you — hoping that nobody will drop in. For evening calls are getting rather frequent of late, more than is desirable some- times, when there is work to do. And the dictated portions of the *Capi- tal* I am obliged to look over while the thing is fresh in my mind and the original at hand ready to correct mistakes. Moreover, there are still translations to revise (last week part of a Danish one of my *Ursprung*[1] — very fair) and Russian pamphlets to decipher (Vera Zasoulitch has sent me one of Plechanoff, polemical against Lavroff and Tichomiroff,[2] and wants me to give her my opinion,[3] and besides these Russian quarrels are not uninteresting) and such like, so that besides the current small fry I have not had time to read a book for months.

The 3rd book [of] *Capital* is getting grander and grander the deep- er I get into it, and I am only (having passed over entirely about 70 pages, more or less superseded by a later manuscript) at page 230 out of 525. It is almost inconceivable how a man who had such tremendous discoveries, such an entire and complete scientific revolu- tion in his head, could keep it there for 20 years. For the ms. I am working at,[4] has been written either before, or at the same time as the *first volume;* and the essential part of it is already in the old manu- script of 1860-1862. 171 The fact is, first the intricacies of the 2nd book (which he wrote last and which alone he touched after 1870) kept him fast, as he of course would have to publish his 3 books in regular order; and then, his Russian and American material for the theory of the rent of land 8 0 would have required working up into the old manuscript and would probably have nearly doubled its size.

Here the two socialist bodies[5] are so far jogging on alongside each other without collision, but the foreign department will very likely embroil them. You may have seen in No. 9 of the *Sozialdemo- krat* a letter from Varenholz, dictated by Hyndman. This rather schnod- drige effusion required a reply which we have concocted and which will come, if possible, in next Saturday's *Sozialdemokrat.* This time, of course, Aveling had to speak out, and that strong enough to stop Hyndman's game once for all.[6]

We have Kautsky here 3 6 5 whom I think you saw before, with a young Viennese wife, a nice little body.[7] They intend settling down here for the present — and live in Maitland Park; just out of the Cres- cent. So there is always some connection going on with the old place. 3 6 8

Pumps and Percy are getting on as usual. On Sundays there is here now a great cardplaying company, some play whist if there are 4 to be got for that, the rest 'Mariage' and 'Nap', games introduced by the noble Percy. His firm had a law-suit which they lost but it is noth- ing serious, only I hope that it will damp poor Percy's ardent faith in English law. The little ones are getting on very well upon the whole; Lily is very amiable and jolly. She has an extremely sharp ear and re- tentive memory for *des jurons*,[8] and you may be sure, that she finds many an opportunity to catch them.

On Saturday[9] Nim and Tussy as well as Pumps will go to High- gate. 369 I cannot go, I am still very changeable with respect to capacity for movement, and have just had a little bit of notice to keep quiet. Anyhow I shall continue working at the book which will be a monu- ment to him, made by himself, grander than any that other people could set for Mohr. Two years already on Saturday! And yet I can truly say that while I work at this book, I am in living communion with him.

The 2nd book is getting on well. 13 sheets corrected. Will you please ask Paul *to send* me at once the address under which he writes to Danielson. I have had a letter from him and want to send the proof-sheets,[10] but am not certain as to address which may besides have been changed.

How is the Montceau Brenin Thévenin affair going on? 3 7 ° And has the *Cri du Peuple* cried his last?

*Amitiés à* Paul.

Yours affectionately,

F. Engels Nim's love!