---
id: MECW47-200
title: "Letter to Hermann Schluter, October 9, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 October 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 9 October 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Yesterday I sent the introduction;[1] to the *Cologne Trial*[2] to Ede in case he wished to print it beforehand in the *Sozialdemokrat,* in which case he would have to arrange matters with you.[3] Herewith now the list of contents to show you how it has been arranged; also printing errors in, and notes on, the Leipzig edition of 1875.[4] I have included only the London Central Authority's two Addresses of March and June[5] the *Cologne Address* of December 1850[6] offers nothing new in the way of theory, being a detailed account of the party's break-up which today would be of importance only in a *circumstantial* history of the movement of those days.

The thing has got badly behindhand — through no fault of my own. *La bravoure, c'est dans le ventre,*[7] as Marshal Davout once said to his host, Marx's father-in-law,[8] when the latter congratulated him on his appetite. *L'esprit, c'est dans le ventre*[9] is what I say, after discovering to what depths of stupidity and incapacity one can be reduced by catarrh of the stomach. To sweat away for five hours at one page and then furiously consign what one has written to the flames — WELL, it's all over now, not to return for a very long time, or so I hope.

Tomorrow I shall tackle the introduction to the *Schlesische Milliarde.*

As regards the June battle, however, there's nothing doing yet. I have become convinced that the things from the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* can't be printed on their own without a *real* history of events. But this would call for specialised studies which can't be done until I have sorted out the piles of Marx's pamphlets, because only then shall I know *what* stuff I have yet to procure for the purpose. And only then could I embark on my studies. So for the time being this will have to be shelved.

With kindest regards,

Yours,

F. Engels