---
id: MECW47-156
title: "Letter to Hermann Schluter, February 22, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 February 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Vo"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 22 February 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

I look forward to seeing the proof-sheets of the *Anti-Dühring.*[1]

In Wigand's case *° matters stand thus: it had already been noted in Leipzig in 1875 or 1876 that no more copies of the *Condition* were available and I possess the original invoice marked 'last copies'. However no harm can be done if confirmation of this is once again provided by the other party. I have at long last been given a legal opinion from which I gather that the matter is by no means as simple as had appeared at first glance. Now that I know how I stand, I shall take further steps and advise you as soon as I receive a positive reply from Wigand.

I knew Schabelitz even before 1848 when he was here in London and belonged to the Communist Society.;[2] Give him my kindest regards when you see him. Your explanation re the alleged 'ban' was just what I wanted[3] it is quite typical of the German book trade. Obviously nothing can be done about it so long as not one agent can be found who is possessed of pluck. But the bulk of bourgeois readers don't buy our stuff, so in this case pluck is not a particularly paying proposition. It was a different matter when banned books were merely liberal or radical, or even when, prior to 1848, communism was still a cause with which the bourgeoisie flirted.

The last ms. of the 2nd book of *Capital* goes off tomorrow, and day after tomorrow I shall start on the 3rd book. So long as I have it on my conscience, I shall be unable to give serious thought to anything else.

Please tell Ede that I shall write to him as soon as I have a spare moment.

Kindest regards from

Yours,

F. Engels