---
id: MECW47-106
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, August 6, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
publication: "First published in the language of the original (English) in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Printed according to a photocopy of the original Published in English in"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

Worthing, 6 August 1884

48 Marine Parade

My dear Laura,

Here we are and here is our address in as primitive a place as the British sea-side will admit of[1] — the first lodgings we took we had to leave because the old Madam objected to smoking!!

No Lager Beer as yet, but Percy is hunting some up at Brighton — as soon as that is to hand I will try whether I can digest Leroy-Beaulieu;[2] it is blazing hot but fine continental heat and sea-breeze, the Channel is right before our noses but at ebbtide about *1½* mile away. Pumps and Nim just come in for beer, they say it is so hot they cannot stand it outside any longer and the house is indeed cooler.

Why, after all *ces pauvres parisiens*[3] will be done out of their share of cholera! What a shame after all their preparations.

Nim just says she hopes she has come into a fortune on July 31st in that grand drawing in Paris. If so, you are to telegraph at once to the Baroness de Demuth at the above address, as she wants to come out with a grand treat.

I am lazy and have so many letters to write! So I hope I shall have good news from Paul, that is to say that the great Leroy-Beaulieu is not in such a hurry to pocket his thrashing.[4]

Anyhow, I must take *beneficium caloris*[5] and conclude. The whole lot send any amount of loves, ditto

Yours affectionately,

F. E.