---
id: MECW47-222
title: "Letter to Hermann Schluter, December 21, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "21 December 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 21 December 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

20 *Dührings* (in all) and 4 of the *Peasant War* received with thanks.[1]

Kindly tell Mrs Wischnewetzky that, *as agreed,* I shall be prepared to go over the ms. of her translation[2] and write the preface[3] as soon as she has made a *firm arrangement* with a publisher. I'm so snowed under with work that it's downright impossible to take on anything else unless it's urgently required.

I shan't be able to turn my mind to a new German edition[4] until I have shed considerable part of my present load of work. In January I have to revise the English translation of *Capital,* negotiate with the publishers, etc. After that there's the *Peasant War*[5] and numerous other incidental jobs. Then comes the very urgent matter of the *Capital,* Volume III. Once I've cleared the decks to that extent, I'll be able to turn my mind to the old book.[6]

I cannot recall the pamphlet mentioned by Bucher.[7] Peel died in 1850. Marx's PAMPHLETS[8] appeared in 1855. Nor is it likely that Palmerston would have given some writer or other 100 guineas and a cask of sherry to provide proof that Palmerston was a Russian agent. It is possible that Tucker, when alluding to the earlier piece, suggested the same title for one of Marx's PAMPHLETS; that would explain everything. Nor were there any woodcuts in Marx's PAMPHLETS.

Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. Engels

Martignetti wants to translate *Wage Labour and Capital*?[9] into Italian along with a biography of Marx which he hasn't got, as the few scrappy items in the *Socialiste*[10] are inadequate. Could you send him Bracke's *Volks-Kalender* containing my biography of Marx[11] I think it's in the 1878 volume, but you'll find it easily enough. The address is

Pasquale[12] Martignetti
Benevento, Italia.