---
id: MECW47-076
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, April 18, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "18 April 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Translated from the French Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 18 April 1884

My dear Paul,

A quarter to 5 — so must hurry! My congratulations on the success of your Congress,[1] a success that is evident from the different way in which the earlier and later meetings are reported in the *Journal de Roubaix.* The Germans did right in not sending a delegate, for had they done so it would have unduly facilitated the further retention of the Exceptional Law by the government and the bourgeoisie; the *moderates* in our party (very numerous among the leaders, very few among the masses, who are first-rate) would have exploited this; such a mistake would have been impermissible. In cases of this kind, demonstrations, even international ones, must be foregone.

When shall I get back the ms. of the translation?[2] This time you really must try harder, I beg of you. It is essential that the thing should either be done well or not at all. And when will it be possible to begin printing? I ask this so that I can make arrangements to write a few notes and a short preface[3] —if you like you can do a preface and send it to me here. You asked that you be given precedence over the German edition; but I have got a complete ms. of the first part of the latter and the Zurich people will begin printing the moment a manuscript reaches them.

What with this German text and the English *Capital* to revise,[4] my hands are full, and accordingly I wish to know how to arrange things so as to avoid unnecessary loss of time. For it's essential that I get down to the 2nd volume[5] — and now Zurich has to inform me of the need for a 2nd edition of my *Anti-Dühring*[6] and a 4th of the *Peasant War,* which means further revisions and further prefaces to be done! And that's what I — and Mr Bismarck — have gained from the banning of my books in Germany!

Old William[7] is more or less *in extremis*[8] He no longer recognises those who come to see him, nor can he repeat the phrases he has been taught to say by rote in reply to deputations.

Nim has just come back from shopping, she sends you her **amours** (LOVES) and as much as you want of them.

Yours ever,

F.E.

*Twenty minutes past five.*