---
id: MECW47-033
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, September 19, 1883"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "19 September 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 19 September 1883

My dear Laura,

At last returned from Eastbourne,[1] where correspondence was rendered difficult and almost impossible by circumstances. When proof-sheets[2] arrived — 3 times a week — my company left me to my work, but on the silent understanding that I was not to exact any- thing further — and how indeed could I have asked for peace and quietness in the one sitting room allotted to us all, especially when the thirst for Pilsener drove them in at certain times of the day?

I was besides busy with Sam Moore's specimen translation[3] the greater part of which is very good and lively; the beginning — rather a difficult chapter[4] — wanted a deal of 'look after', on account of his not having been exact enough in rendering the terminology, but that could be easily settled. I am certain from what I have seen that he will do the job well.

I also began revising Deville's pamphlet,[5] it requires more work, especially in the beginning where great precision is necessary, but is wanting here and there. However I shall have no difficulty in setting that right, only it will take a week or a fortnight. I shall set to work ser- iously to-morrow. As far as I have gone, I am much pleased with his work, he has well understood everything (except small details) and it is written in a more lively style than I thought it would be.

As soon as that is shaken off I begin with the 2nd volume [of] *Kapital.*

I hope you received my post-card with the information you had asked me for. It was sent the day after I received your letter.

We came back last Friday, Pumps and Percy stayed here over Sunday, their house not being in order. Since then we had a thunder- storm and fearful rain in parts of London which flooded their back drawing-room. Otherwise they are flourishing. The little boy is get- ting on wonderfully well, he was five months yesterday, and is ex- tremely intelligent for his age.

Nim declares she must reduce her allowance of beer. She thinks she is getting too fat with it.

This morning Lopatin walks in, his adventures have ripened him considerably. He will be here again directly and have dinner with us. He says he saw Paul lately and found him well and content, all things considered.

Tussy I have not seen yet, I believe she is not in town, I wrote her a line but she did not turn up on Sunday. As soon as Nim can get off she'll call on her.

Of my little pamphlet *Entwicklung etc.* two editions are already sold, the third is in the press.[6] That shows anyhow that it is not too difficult for the mass of the working people in Germany.

When this letter arrives, Paul will have 'done' 2/3rds of his time — I hope he will keep his pluck up for the two last and most trying months.

Of the 3rd edition [of] *Kapital* I have read proofs up to page 448, so if they go on at this rate, the whole will be completed by Decem- ber. I am sorry Mohr has not lived to see how well this time the thing is done: no delay, no trouble with the printers, no trifling complaint but is at once set right, and excellent proofs with very few mistakes. Leipzig seems at last, and at least in this one respect of printing, to become **ein klein Paris**[7] High time it was.

So now I conclude this budget of miscellaneous news in order to set a few little jobs right before Lopatin drops in again. Kind regards for Paul and a hearty kiss for yourself from

Yours affectionately,

*Le général pour rire*[8]