---
id: MECW47-252
title: "Letter to August Bebel, April 12, 1886"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 April 1886"
year: 1886
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN LEIPZIG

London, 12 April 1886

Dear Bebel,

Thank you for the debate on the Anti-Socialist Law—it pleased me tremendously.[1] Here again we have something that does credit to the movement and this is the impression it gives from beginning to end. Even Liebknecht was quite his old self again; competition from the French seems to have had a good effect on him.[2] I like the spectacle of the whole gang—or pack of dogs ramer—crowding round you barking and snapping, only to be beaten off by the lash of a whip. What a mercy that, apart from you and Liebknecht, only Vollmar spoke a word or two, and that Singer, the victim of a concerted attack, was compelled to hit back hard, while the tractable majority held their tongues.

The gentlemen's fears about regicide are too ludicrous. Surely they or their fathers have all of them sung:

Has ever man had such hard luck

As our poor Burgomaster Tschech,

[3][4]

True, the German bourgeoisie still had some vitality in those days; another example of the difference is that 1844 saw the appearance of *Das Lied von Freifrau von Droste-Vischering,*[5] whereas now the *Kulturkampf*[6] is being waged with the most humdrum weapons wielded by the most flaccid hands.

The socialists here have been acquitted.[7] I am sending you today's copy of the highly Conservative *Standard* (also a *Cri du Peuple)* containing an account of the final hearing. You will be able to see from it how a judge goes about his business in England (though admittedly not in *Ireland}.).* Translated from legal jargon, what he said was: The law on seditious speeches applies to the accused, but the law is outdated and invalid in practice. Otherwise you would have to convict every radical spokesman and minister. All you have to ask yourselves, therefore, is this: Was it, or was it not, the intention of the accused that there should be looting on 8 February?[8] And Cave is one of England's 16 principal judges.

The verdict is a fine advertisement for Hyndman, but it has come too late. He has contrived to ruin his organisation beyond hope of repair; in London it's fizzling out, while in the provinces the various organisations have adopted a neutral, wait-and-see attitude to the rifts down here. *Summa summarum* the two organisations—FEDERATION and LEAGUE 346—have a combined paid-up membership of less than 2,000 and their papers^0 a combined readership of less than 5,000—the majority being sympathisers in the persons of bourgeois, priests, literati, etc. As things are now, it is truly fortunate that these immature elements are failing to penetrate the masses. They must first complete the process of fermentation, after which all may be well.

For the rest, one might almost be back in the days of the International. Only this morning a whole stack of German, French, Spanish and Belgian papers arrived and are taking up time I ought to be devoting to the English translation of *Capital.*[9] I only hope there isn't a bust-up before I've managed to finish the 3rd volume—after that it can come, so far as I'm concerned.

Things are going splendidly in Decazeville.[10] You will see from the report *(Cri du Peuple)* of last Sunday's meeting^d (a week ago yesterday) which I am sending you today how skilfully those Parisians, who have been decried as revolutionary braggarts, contrive without relinquishing their revolutionary posture to advocate calm and lawfulness during the strike. It is indicative of the progress the French have made, thanks to the revolutionary soil on which they stand, that in their case there is a complete absence of that mass of sophistries and second thoughts which still confuse the minds of so many people in Germany. That one should proceed lawfully or unlawfully, depending on the circumstances, is taken entirely for granted over there and no one sees anything inconsistent in it. As to Paris, it is significant that up till yesterday the *Cri du Peuple* had raised 35,000 frs for Decazeville, but Rochefort's *Intransigeant* less than 11,000.

Bismarck, who appears to have been in a frightful rage, though obviously speaking for the benefit of the Crown Prince,[11] will doubtless get a reply from Laura and Tussy to the ludicrous insinuations he made about Marx.[12] Of the other speeches, Hänel's^b was the best from a legal viewpoint;[13] he came out with the absurd demand that a citizen should conform to the law not only outwardly but also *inwardly*—that such a thing should be called for, that the mere *intention* and the public expression thereof, could be held punishable by deprivation of rights shows how debased all middle-class concepts of legality have become in Germany—not that they have ever prevailed over there save in the case of the oppositional bourgeoisie; what has, in fact, always prevailed is the illegality of a police state, which in other countries (always excepting Ireland) could only assert itself shamefacedly and in the guise of a *coup de main.*

Must close because registration time (5 o'clock) draws near.

Your

F.E.