---
id: MECW47-064
title: "Letter to Heinrich Nonne, about February 26, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "26 February 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HEINRICH NONNE

IN PARIS

[Draft]

[London, about 26 February 1884]

What I wrote and told you about Malon;[1] are the simple facts of which I have been given proof and which are in no way altered by Paris gossip. Malon did indeed quit the Peace Congress[2] in company with Bakunin and 15 others, and he was a co-founder of the secret Alliance.[3] The document of March 1870 has actually been in my possession[4] what the lies are that Malon has recently been concocting about the International are of no interest to me; I am unlikely so much as to look at them. In my view the fact that he is self-taught does not give him the right to falsify history. If *he* is fit to play a leading role among the French, I am sorry for the French proletariat.

As regards your propagation of international relations,^3

1) the aims are so vague that I really cannot give up any time on the strength of your general prospects;

2) virtually all the people you mention are unknown to me (the only one I know at all *well* is precisely the one you fail to name). But one cannot be active in the international movement for 40 years without having everywhere old friends and allies to whom one is politically and morally committed. I should therefore first have to obtain information from them about many of your people and about the attitude of one side to the other. I cannot very well do that, however, without giving some inkling of your scheme;

3) but I cannot possibly embark on an alliance without having the least idea of where and into what further associations it will lead me. Some kind of central committee would presumably be set up in Paris, which would decide on the admission of new members and on possible action, and it might so happen that I found myself in the same association as people whom I should be compelled to oppose outright or that I became responsible for an action I disapproved of. That is an eventuality I cannot expose myself to at all.

Do not, however, let this deter you. If you are able to achieve something worthwhile, it will please me nonetheless. I am grateful to you for your confidence and remain, etc.