---
id: MECW47-198
title: "Letter to Hermann Schluter, September 23, 1885"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "23 September 1885"
year: 1885
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 23 September 1885

Dear Mr Schlüter,

I. You will have received all the proofs of the *Dühring.*^20S They were sent off from here on the 13th and 14th. If anything is missing kindly let me know; the type-setting was such that there could be absolutely no question of its being printed unless corrected by me.

The last clean proof to arrive here was No. 14. I await the remainder for the list of printing errors. Enclosed a provisional list which corrects a great deal of nonsense, much of which I myself had doubtless allowed to stand. However I shall go through the whole thing once again.

Herewith also and at long last the preface[1] which caused me much toil and sweat. In the first place there were numerous interruptions. But then again my knowledge of natural science was very rusty and there was much I had to look up.

II. Please send me if possible (along with the preface) proofs (in duplicate) of *Marx vor den Geschwornen,*^a or at any rate clean proofs for the list of printing errors. The original edition is not devoid of bad errors; indeed, the worthy compositors sometimes exercise their minds more than the author would wish.

III. 'Preface',[2] etc., to the *Communist Trial*^b will follow this week provided there are no interruptions.

IV. Immediately after that I shall put Lupus'[3] biography to rights for the *Schlesische Milliarde* as well as anything else appertaining to it. This will follow in a few days.

Please send me clean proofs of everything as well as proofs of my prefaces, etc. Also 12 copies of each of the above.

I am also seeing to Marx's photograph. Then I shall get on with re-writing the *Peasant War*^2 ' 3 as soon as I have got the revision of the French 4 4 4 and English translations^6 off my back.

Now that I am back home[4] the correction of proofs will be attended to speedily and punctually.

I have had a good few bones to pick with Mr Meissner about the get-up of the 2nd volume of *Capital.* In the preface and text the type is all jumbled up, although I had already gone a long way towards sorting this out in the proofs, so far as it was possible to do so. No excuse for that. Moreover, there are 500 copies with no index at all. I enclose one copy for the archives.

D f is incorrigible.;[5] His appeal to his papa is touching[6] the old man will take a stick to him.[7]

With best wishes,

Yours,

F. Engels

a *Karl Marx vor den Kölner Geschwornen* - b F. Engels, 'On the History of the Communist League'. - c K. Marx, *Revelations Concerning the Communist Trial in Cologne.*