---
id: MECW47-052
title: "Letter to Pyotr Lavrov, January 28, 1884"
volume: 47
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "28 January 1884"
year: 1884
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 47"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN PARIS

London, 28 January 1884
122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

My dear Lavrov,

Some three weeks ago I sent you a *Standard* containing an article I thought might be of interest to you^c; I hope it reached you safely.

I am at present engaged — as my health at long last permits — in sorting out the books, etc., left by Marx. Amongst other things they comprise, thanks to the kindness of Danielson, an entire library of Russian books, with some very important material on present social conditions in Russia; it contains almost everything that has been brought out on the subject. At my age, and overburdened as I am with work, it would be impossible for me to resume *a novo*[1] the thorough-going survey of Russia so unfortunately interrupted by the death of our friend.[2] So it seemed to me, and Tussy is of the same opinion, that it was our duty to place these books at your disposal. In your capacity as the acknowledged representative of the revolutionary Russian emigration and as an old friend of the deceased, you have clearly more right than anyone else to the collection of books so devotedly provided by friends, both yours and ours, in Russia — either for your personal use or to form the nucleus of a library for the revolutionary Russian emigration. If you accept, I could send them either to your own address or to any other you might indicate this February. The only books I should keep here would be those from which Marx had made extracts, along with one or two others which I might need for the second volume of *Capital*^1; the remainder when all deductions have been made, would amount to a hundred or so volumes at the outside.[3]

As for the second volume, I am at last beginning to see daylight. For the most important parts — i. e. the beginning and the end of the second book, *Circulation of Capital,* — we have a version dating from 1875 and later. To this nothing needs to be added save quotations in accordance with the indications supplied. For the middle section there are no fewer than four versions dating from before 1870, and therein lies the only difficulty. The third volume, *Capitalist Production as a Whole,* exists in two versions dating from before 1869; subsequent to that there is nothing but a few notes and a notebook full of equations, the purpose of which is to arrive at the many reasons why the *Mehrwertsrate* becomes the *Profitrate*.[4][5] But the extracts from books both on Russia and on the United States[6] contain a vast amount of material and copious notes on land rent, while others relate to money capital, to credit and to paper money as an instrument of credit, etc. As yet I do not know what use I shall be able to make of this for the third book; it might perhaps be better to combine them in a separate publication, and I shall certainly do so if the difficulty of incorporating them into *Capital* proves too great. My chief concern is that the book should come out as soon as possible, and also and above all that the book I publish should be unmistakably a work by *Marx.*

Any day now we should receive copies of the 3rd edition of Volume I, and one will be sent off to you as soon as they arrive.

The Russian publications from Geneva — the *Manifesto,* etc.[7] — gave me much pleasure.

I have just had a letter from two Poles, Krzywicki and Sosnowski, requesting our consent to a Polish translation of *Capital* which, of course, we gave. Sosnowski is in Paris; do you, by any chance, know these citizens?[8]

Yours ever,

F. Engels