---
id: MECW26-063
title: "Amendments to the Programme of the North of England Socialist Federation"
volume: 26
doc_type: article
author: "Frederick Engels"
written: "14 June 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "Written between June 14 and 23, 1887 First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XVI, Part 1, Moscow, 1937 Reproduced from the Principles with amendments in Engels' hand Pu"
status: raw
---

Engels made the amendments to the programme of the North of England Socialist Federation at the request of John Lincoln Mahon, an English worker and socialist. In a letter to him of June 22, 1887, Engels voiced his appreciation of the programme, saying: "I consider it very good as a spontaneous working-class declaration of principles" (present edition, Vol. 48). Engels' amendments relate mainly to the introductory part of the programme; he made them on the leaflet containing the text of the programme.

The North of England Socialist Federation—a workers' organisation set up in Northumberland (Northern England) on April 30, 1887 during a major miners' strike that lasted from late February to June 24, 1887. The organisation was sponsored by John Mahon, Thomas Binning, Alexander Donald, et al. Throughout 1887, the Federation conducted active work among the workers but failed to consolidate its initial success and soon ceased to exist.

***Wage-workers of all Countries—Unite!***

**THE NORTH OF ENGLAND SOCIALIST FEDERATION**

(FOUNDED IN NORTHUMBERLAND, MAY, 1887)

The North of England Socialist Federation has been formed to educate and organize the people to achieve the economic emancipation of labour.

While fully sympathising with and helping every effort of the wage-earners to win better conditions of life under the present system, the Socialist Federation aims at abolishing the Capitalist and Landlord class, *as well as the wage-working* class, and forming // the workers of society // *all members of society* into a Co-operative Commonwealth.

An employing class monopolising all the means of getting and making wealth, and a wage-earning class compelled to work //primarily// for the profit of these employers, is a system of tyranny and slavery.

The antagonism of these two classes //brings about// *manifests itself in* fierce competition — for employment amongst the workers and for markets amongst the capitalists. This //gives rise to class hatred and class strife // *divides the nation against itself, forms it into two hostile camps*, and destroys real independence, liberty, and happiness.

The present system gives ease and luxury to the idlers, toil and poverty to the workers, and degradation to all; it is essentially unjust and should be abolished. *And it can be abolished, now that the productiveness of labour has become so vast that no extension of markets can absorb its overflowing produce, the very superabundance of the means of life and of enjoyment thus becoming the cause of stagnation of trade, want of employment and consequent misery of the toiling millions.*

Our aim is to bring about a Socialist System which will give healthy and useful labour to all, ample wealth and leisure to all, and the truest and fullest freedom to all.

All are invited to help the Socialist Federation in this great cause. Adherents shall acknowledge truth, justice, and morality as the basis of their conduct towards each other and towards all men. **They shall acknowledge *no rights without duties: no duties without rights.***