---
id: MECW45-292
title: "Letter to Johann Philipp Becker, December 19, 1879"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "19 December 1879"
year: 1879
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, *Vergessene Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker),* Berlin, 1920 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-E"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 19 December 1879

Dear Old Man,

I was supposed to be getting some money yesterday and it had long been understood that you would thereupon at once be sent a remittance. But it came too late for me to draw a money order that same day, and all through the afternoon I kept thinking: A letter's bound to arrive from Philipp this evening! And sure enough, it did arrive. So you've deprived me of the pleasure of giving you an unexpected Christmas treat. Well then, I have drawn a money order for five pounds sterling, against which, according to the rate here, 126 frs should be paid to you over there — as will, no doubt, be done without delay.

Over here we are all so-so; I can't complain, Marx is fitter than last year, although he still isn't really up to the mark. Mrs Marx has long been subject to bouts of indigestion and is seldom entirely well. The second volume[1] is making slow progress, nor is it likely to progress any faster until a summer better than the last one enables Marx to recover properly for once.[2]

Yesterday I wrote and told Bebel)[3] that we couldn't contribute to the *Sozialdemokrat.* From Höchberg's subsequent letters it emerges that he intends, as a matter of course, to continue advocating in the *Sozialdemokrat* the views expressed in the *Jahrbuch*.[4] And as long as the Leipzigers remain on their present footing with him and his philistine colleagues, I cannot see how they can refuse to allow this. But it also means that we are excluded. Having combatted this same petty-bourgeois socialism ever since the *Manifesto*[5] (indeed, since Marx's anti-Proudhon piece[6], we cannot go hand in hand with it at a moment when it is using the Anti-Socialist Law[7] as a pretext for raising its banner again. And it is better so. We would involve ourselves in an endless debate with these gentry, the *Sozialdemokrat* would become a battle- ground, and in the end we should after all be forced publicly to announce our resignation. Not that all this would be of use to anyone save the Prussians and the bourgeois, and so we would rather avoid it. But this should not be regarded as a model by other people—those who, unlike us, have not themselves been forced *by these particular negotiations* to pick up the gauntlet thrown down by Höchberg and Co. I see no reason at all why you, for example, should not contribute to the paper.[8] The articles from German working men are the only things in it that give one any pleasure, and things of yours could only enhance the paper; and since it does exist, a paper that's as good as it's possible to make it is, after all, preferable to one that is merely bad. I say this on the assumption that these people pay you properly, for it would be asking altogether too much of a man in your position that he should, into the bargain, work for nothing. In fact, we're not particularly incensed against the Leipzigers over this business. We saw it coming for years. For Liebknecht cannot resist mediating and making friends left and right, nor is he exactly fussy about what elements have been imported so long as the party gives the appearance of being really strong and having plenty of members and, if possible, funds. And so he'll go on until one day he burns his fingers. When that happens the better men will no doubt revert to the right course.

The *Freiheit* is all sound and fury, quite devoid of content or meaning, and Most, who in other respects is not without talent, has here shown himself incapable of producing a single idea since he uprooted himself from the bedrock of the party. If I've got to have undiluted abuse, then give me the late Karl Heinzen any day; he succeeded in being even more ham-handed.

The powers of attorney have all gone off to New York,[9] since when nothing more has been heard. There's no relying on Liebknecht's expectations, of which he always has more than is good for him.

For years Lessner has had nothing much to do with the Society here;[10] he seldom turns up, and then doesn't do anything much except grumble and grouse about the course of things generally.

In Russia matters are going splendidly! They'll soon come to blows there. And when that happens, the bowels of the great men of the German Empire will instantly turn to water—a veritable flux! That will be the next turning point of world history.

You shouldn't allow the poor anarchists to irritate you so.[11]

They, too, are in a truly forlorn state. In the West they have nothing left to do save be anarchical amongst themselves and tear one another's hair out, and in Russia all their murderous deeds achieve—as they have just discovered to their dismay—is pulling the Constitutionals'[12] chestnuts out of the fire for them!

Regards from Marx and

Your

F. E.