---
id: MECW45-142
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, February 23, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "23 February 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Brighton, 23 February 1877

42 King's Road

Dear Moor,

I wrote to Bignami last week, took out a subscription to the *Plebe,* and wrote to him about the elections.[1] Three days ago, before we left,[2] I received 3 numbers, and he is going to let me have some that are missing.[3] My intervention could not have come at a better time.

*Plebe,* 7 January, reports proceedings at the Assizes against *Bignami,* the *Questore*)[4] of Turin (the self-same man who treated Terzaghi to a 'vermouth', see *Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste*[5], for *embezzlement* (*tout comme chez nous*)[6]. A policeman, one Blandini, stated that, on Bignami's orders, he had carried out a *pro-forma*[7] house search chez Terzaghi, having also been ordered by Bignami only to remove what Terzaghi should give him. When a warrant went out for Terzaghi's arrest, he had already been notified by another policeman, Premerlani, acting on Bignami's orders; Terzaghi *era un agente segreto di Bignami che gli dava tre lire*[8] (francs) *al giorno!* About which the *Plebe* remarked that this showed what use the *fondi segreti dei governi di classe*[9] were put to. To which there came a reply from a little Bakuninist sheet, *II Martello*[10] —the name betrays my Cafiero.—Since discussion of the revolting Terzaghi case was not permissible, the little sheet fastened on the *fondi segreti dei governi di classe:* so in your case, it said, the *governi non di classe*[11] would likewise have *fondi segreti,*[12] so in your case, too, everything would remain as before—there follows all the same old anarchist rigmarole *que l'on sait.*[13] Having replied to this in due form, the *Plebe* at once proceeded to attack the *Bulletin Jurassien* for having been sent into a rage by four lines in the *Plebe* and acting as though the *Plebe* were enraged although it had simply been *edificata*[14] by the *Jurassien's* insinuation.

Come to that, [said the *Plebe,]* one would have to be exceedingly *ingenuo*[15] to take the bait proffered by people who, green with envy, went knocking at door after door to beg for a bit of animosity towards us in return for their calumnies. The hand, which has long been sowing tares and discord, is sufficiently well known for its Loyolan[16] machinations to be instantly detectable and *gli onesti non ne facciano tantosto giustizia?*[17]

The same No. contains a letter from E. Dörenberg (Drbg. of the *Berliner Freie Presse)* on the elections in Berlin.

No. of 16 February, letter from Brussels, 'Cesar De Paepe' about the recent Flemish agitation for factory laws and general suffrage, ends:

*Noi crediamo altresi di arrivare, con questo metodo, più prontamente e più puramente all'emancipazione del proletario, piuttosto che star Xi, abbaiando alia luna per degli anni e dei quarti di secolo, e attendendo che mamma Rivoluzione voglia degnarsi di venire a spezzarsi le catene dei lavoratori)*[18]

It further speaks of old Becker's proclamation[19] as a *symptom,* and in most amicable terms.

A very delighted letter from Bignami today, in which he says he will print my stuff on the elections, and confirms that the *Federazione dell'alta Italia,*[20] which extends from Venice to Turin and will shortly be holding a congress,[21] *vuole lottare sul terreno del suffragio universale.*[22] The *Plebe* is its official organ.

Thus the stronghold of lawyers, literati and dilettanti in Italy has been breached. And the best part of it is that all the former Alliance men[23] in Milan, Mauro Gandolfi, etc., of Cuno's time also seem to have gone over. Indeed, a bogus working men's movement could not have survived long in an industrial city like Milan. And Northern Italy is decisive not only strategically, but also to the working men's movement throughout the whole length of the agrarian peninsula.

Thus the world government in Neuchâtel[24] has nothing left that is uncontested except for Spain, and how long will that last?

If these events are to be followed more closely, by the way, it is high time that Mr Demuth took out a subscription to the *Bulletin jurassien,* as agreed. After all, we've got to know what anathemas are being uttered by the Holy See's universal dictator and deputy.[25]

Warmest regards to all,

Your

F. E.