---
id: MECW45-260
title: "Letter to Jenny Longuet, August 19, 1879"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "19 August 1879"
year: 1879
publication: "First published in the languages of the original (German, French and English) in *Annali,* an. I, Milano, 1958 This letter was published in English for the first time in: K. Marx, *On Education, Women"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET

IN RAMSGATE

St Hélier, 19 August 1879

Hôtel de l'Europe

My dear beloved Jennychen,

Long live the little citizen of the world![1] *Il faut peupler le monde de garçons d'autant plus que la statistique anglaise montre un excès de filles.* I'm glad that the catastrophe has proceeded auspiciously so far, though unfortunately under somewhat difficult circumstances. The ARRANGEMENT made by Mamma strikes me as being[2] far from the most convenient. At all events, Tussy and myself leave to-morrow for London and then I shall be very soon *at your side*[3] and everything will be quietly settled. Here the rainy time— otherwise so unknown to this delicious island—has again set in, so that we had already commenced discussing our departure, the whole aspect of our sojourn here having changed with the climatic and météorologie changes.

The Hôtel de l'Europe is excellent and one day we must go here together, *toute la famille.*

I can hardly expect to-morrow morning when the boat will start from here to Southampton. I feel so anxious with you and little Johnny.

In the meantime

my best

compliments

to Mamma

and Longuet. Just don't fret or worry, my child, everything will turn out all right.

Your trusty

OLD NICK[4]

You must excuse the brevity of this note, the reason being that the letter has to be posted at once.