---
id: MECW45-257
title: "Letter to August Bebel, August 4, 1879"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 August 1879"
year: 1879
publication: "First published in *Die Kommunistische Internationale,* Heft 23, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the copy checked against the manuscript of the draft Published in English for the first time in Marx-"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL[1]

IN LEIPZIG [Copy]

London, 4 August 1879

Dear Bebel,

Since I last wrote on 25 July^1'^1' Hirsch has informed us of his correspondence with Bernstein and Liebknecht about the new

a In the original, the following passage is deleted: 'and the class struggle which finally leads to a social revolution. What distinguishes critical and revolutionary

[2][3][4][5]

paper.[6] To judge by this, matters would appear to be materially different from what your letter had entitled us to assume.

Since Hirsch's altogether justifiable inquiries as to what arrange- ments had been made and who would be running the paper, on the one hand financially, on the other administratively, met with no other reply from Liebknecht save: 'the party plus Höchberg',[7]

and the reiterated assurance that everything was in order—we could only assume, even then, that the paper would be financed by Höchberg and that the 'we' to whom, according to E. Bern- stein's letter, 'the production and supervision' would be en- trusted,[8] would, once again, be Höchberg and his secretary Bernsteine

From Bernstein's second letter to Hirsch just received, it transpires that such is indeed the case.[9]

You will not, I presume, fail to perceive that the errors against which I warned in my last [letter] will now almost inevitably form an intrinsic part of the paper. Höchberg has shown himself to be exceedingly muddle-headed in matters of theory and, in practice, impelled by an irresistible urge to fraternise with all and sundry who profess to be, not merely socialist, but also and even simply *social.* He showed his true colours in the *Zukunft,* discrediting the party both as regards theory and in practice.

What the party needs above all is a *political* organ. And really Höchberg is at best a wholly unpolitical man, not even a social *democrat,* but a social *philanthropist.* Nor, according to Bernstein's letter, is the paper *to be in the least political,* but socialist on principle, which, in such hands, necessarily means social-fantastic, a new edition of the *Zukunft.* A paper of this kind would represent the party only if the latter were willing to degrade itself and become a mere appendage to Höchberg and his armchair socialist friends. If the party leaders were really to try and bring the proletariat under the leadership of Höchberg and his ambiguous friends, the workers would be unlikely to go along with them;

11 The following is deleted in the manuscript of the draft: 'That C. Hirsch cannot assume the editorship in these circumstances without quite *specific* guarantees of his independence vis-à-vis his superior on the financial side, goes without saying. I doubt very much whether *sufficient* guarantees of this kind could be given, and regard it as fairly certain that the negotiations with C. Hirsch will come to nothing. But even were they to succeed, it is virtually certain that Hirsch's position would

[10][11][12][13]

dissension and disorganisation would inevitably result; but Most and the ranters over here would experience their greatest triumph.

In these circumstances, which were quite unknown to us when I wrote my last letter, we believe that Hirsch is absolutely right in refusing to have anything to do with the matter. The same applies to Marx and myself. Our consent regarding contributions was given in respect of a genuine party organ and hence was applicable only to such — not, however, to a private organ of Mr Höchberg's masquerading as a party organ. To that we would in no circumstances contribute.[14] Marx and I therefore specifically ask that you should kindly ensure we are not named as contributors.