---
id: MECW45-048
title: "Letter to Jenny Marx, May 10, 1875"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 May 1875"
year: 1875
publication: "First published in *Annali* an. 1, Milano, 1958 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JENNY MARX

IN SHANKLIN

[London,] 10 May 1875

Dear Jenny,

We have all been greatly concerned about your indisposition, but after the CASTOR-OIL and now that the weather is fine, I hope it has passed.

Engels' suggestion that I accompany him to Shanklin suited me quite well in that I thought it expedient to stay there, if only for your sake; but I would not have wished him to delay on my account or, on the other hand, to restrict my freedom of movement, thereby inconveniencing both me and himself. I am awaiting the final PROOF-SHEETS from Paris, you see, and would have no peace of mind if, because of my absence, the unspeakably protracted publication of the final instalments[1] were to be still further protracted. This time I have received two letters in succession from Lachâtre who is presently staying in Vevey (Switzerland). The fool expresses his utmost satisfaction with the *dernières livraisons*[2] these being, he says, generally comprehensible, i.e. even to him. Of course, I shall not reply to this stuff, any more than to his disgruntled letter from Brussels.

I have sent off the circular (now already in Bracke's possession) on Liebknecht-Hasselmann's concoction; it's a little pamphlet; also given the required information to Mr Schramm in Berlin; finally, made Willebrord unhappy by STRICTLY refusing to collaborate in any way on a journal[3] under the editorship of *Messieurs de 'L'Indépendance*.[4] I'm sorry for Willebrord's sake, but really, what a nonsensical request.[5]

Here at home everything goes on as usual. It seems to me that the finer weather is doing Jennychen good. To her great satisfaction MOTHER Lormier has subjected Longuet to a merciless criticism of his 'French' furniture RUBBISH. Lafargue's business appears to be getting on all right.[6]

I'm minding the house today, since Lenchen and Tussy have gone into town where they are to meet Jennychen at a furniture auction.

Our little garden is beginning to look quite green and cheerful. Lopatin paid me a surprise visit on Friday.[7] The following Saturday he was already on his way to Hastings where he is to spend a few months. In Paris he found that his lodgings were never for one moment free of Russian visitors, which made it impossible for him to work.

With love,

Your

Karl

Give Madame Lizzy my regards.