---
id: MECW45-149
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 7, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 March 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN BRIGHTON

[London,] 7 March 1877

DEAR FRED,

As I might forget to do so later, I am sending off this contribution in the wake of my last epistle:[2]

1. The most important point of Hume's view of the influence of an increase in money on the stimulation of industry, a point which shows more clearly than anything else (if, indeed, there had been any room for DOUBT on this score) that he sees this increase as occurring only in conjunction with a depreciation of precious metals, a point to which Hume reverts on various occasions, as is apparent if only from the excerpt I have sent—is that **THE PRICE OF LABOUR** rises only in the last resort, after that of all other commodities.[3] Now M. Dühring[4][5] says not a word about this; indeed, Hume whom he praises so highly, is treated by him in as slovenly and superficial a fashion as all the rest. Besides, assuming he had noticed the thing, which is more than doubtful, he would have seen fit, having regard to the workers, not to praise a theory of this kind but rather TO BURKE THE WHOLE.

2. My own particular way of dealing with the Physiocrats[6] —i.e. as the first methodical (not, like Petty, etc., merely casual) *exponents of capital* and of the *capitalist mode of production*—was something I did not, of course, wish to put on display just yet. The fact is, IN PLAIN WORDS SAID, that my viewpoint might be taken up and simultaneously debased by charlatans before I had a chance to expound it. Which is why I did not touch on this in the exposé I sent you.

But in dealing with Diihring it might perhaps be fitting to draw attention to the following two passages in *CAPITAL.* I quote them from the *French* edition because they are less vague here than in the German original:

*With reference to the Tableau Économique*:'[7]La reproduction annuelle est un procès très facile à saisir tant que l'on ne considère que le fonds de la production annuelle, mais tous les éléments de celle-ci doivent passer par le marché. Là les mouvements des capitaux et des revenus se croisent, s'entremêlent et se perdent dans un mouvement général de déplacement—la circulation de la richesse sociale—qui trouble la vue de l'obser-vateur et offre à l'analyse des problèmes très-compliqués. C'est le grand mérite des physiocrates d'avoir les premiers essayé de donner, dans leur *tableau économique,* une image de la reproduc-tion annuelle telle qu'elle sort de la circulation. Leur exposition est à beaucoup d'égards plus près de la vérité que celle de leurs successeurs'.[8] (258, 259.)

*With reference to the definition of 'travail productif'*:* 'Aussi l'économie politique classique -a-t-elle toujours, tantôt instinctivement, tantôt consciemment, soutenu que ce qui carac-térisait le travail productif, c'était de rendre *une plus-value.* Ses définitions du travail productif, changent à mesure qu'elle pousse plus avant son analyse de la plus-value. Les physiocrates, par exemple, déclarent que le travail agricole seul est productif. Et pourquoi? Parce que seul il donne une plus-value qui, pour eux, n'existe que sous la forme de la rente foncière.'[9][10] (p. 219).

'Although the Physiocrats could not penetrate the mystery of surplus value, yet this much was clear to them, viz., that it was *"une richesse indépendante et disponible qu'il"* (the possessor thereof) *"n'a point achetée et qu'il vend"*[11] (Turgot) (p. 554, *Capital,* 2nd German ed.), and that the same could not arise out of circulation (I.c., *Capital,* pp. 141-145).

I happened to be at DINNER when the GREAT Barry arrived IN GREAT HURRY with 8 newspapers under his arm.

English newspaper editors are quite extraordinary ANIMALS. The EDITOR of *Vanity Fair* (i.e. the subordinate one; Mr Bowles, the head and PROPRIETOR, a semi-Urquhartite, has gone to Spain with his wife for the benefit of the latter's health) had at length published the article[12] from which the Scottish *Morning News* and the London *Whitehall Review* had shied away, ditto the 6 GOVERNMENTAL PAPERS, or rather the *CENTRAL PRESS* which is in the hands of the Tory Ministry and puts their stuff together for them.

*Bon.*[13] The same *Vanity Fair* MAN has, by way of revenge, now taken fright in his turn at the prospect of reprinting (in the interests of the cause and Mr Barry) the article already printed by those 8 journals, namely the one relating to Gladstone's ARTICLE IN THE *Contemporary Review.*[14] Writes, asking Barry what to do in the event of a LIBEL action. I gave Barry—who had providently come already armed with the above-mentioned 8 PAPERS—instructions as to what answer he should give. I MUST BE VERY MUCH MISTAKEN IF EVEN THIS HESITATION (WHICH WE SHALL, HOWEVER, OVERCOME) HAS NOT SOMETHING TO DO WITH THE 'SCRUPLES' OF MR COLLET. IT IS, IN FACT, TOO BAD TO TAKE THE SECRET DIPLOMACY BUSINESS OUT OF THEIR HANDS.'

By the by, Russian diplomacy has degenerated into pure farce. Mr Ignatiyev's TOUR, whether or not it is initially successful, will still remain, no matter what the circumstances, an even more grotesque and compromising pilgrimage than that of Mr Thiers after the farrago of the 4th of September.[15]

From the magnanimous *Gambuzzi* I have received an epilogue, 9 PAGES long, of his own contriving, upon the magnanimous *Fanelli,* who has just died. Presumably intended to make me repent of the insulting remarks about *ejusdem*[16][17] Fanelli in the piece concerning the Alliance.[18]

Your

K. M.