---
id: MECW45-053
title: "Letter to Matilda Betham-Edwards, July 14, 1875"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 July 1875"
year: 1875
publication: "First published abridged in *Sotheby and Co. Catalogue of Valuable Printed Books, Autograph Letters, Historical Documents, etc.,* London, 1952, and in full, in Chinese, in Marx/Engels, *Collected Work"
status: raw
---

MARX TO MATILDA BETHAM-EDWARDS

IN LONDON

[London,] 14 July 1875
41 Maitland Park Crescent, N. W. Sir,[1]

In your article 'The International Working Men's Association'[2] there occur matter-of-facts errors to some of which I shall call your attention. But before doing so, allow me to express my astonishment at your statement:

'We believe that an abbreviated translation of this work' *(Das Kapital)* 'is to be brought out shortly.'

I have reserved the right of translation and there exists a copyright treaty between Germany and England.[3] I shall, therefore, certainly stop the circulation of any such epitome, *not beforehand authorised by me.* Abbreviation affords the *traduttore*[4] peculiar facilities to turn *traditore.*[5] Even the *revision* of the not-abbreviated French translation, published in *livraisons*[6] at Paris, has given me more trouble than the re-writing the whole book in French would have done.[7]

Supposing that you know the translator, and being anxious to avoid the nuisance of law-proceedings, I have taken the liberty to write to you upon this subject.

With regard to the matter-of-fact errors occurring in your article, I shall limit myself to a few items.

You say:

'*Das Kapital* came out soon after Proudhon's essays on the *Fallacies of Political Economy,* and *in a little chapter* called the *Miseries of Philosophy* Marx answered Proudhon's *chapter* on the *Philosophy of Misery',* etc.

It was Proudhon's voluminous work: *Systeme des Contradictions Economiques ou Philosophie de la Misère,* to which I replied by the brochure, written in French, *Misère de la Philosophie.*[8] The latter was published in 1847, but *Das Kapital* only twenty years later, in 1867. I suppose that you have been led into error by Fribourg's most untrustworthy publication on the 'International'.[9]

Not being aware that, when giving in full the preamble of the Rules, and parts of the Inaugural Address of the International, you were actually quoting writings from my pen, you reprint from an address, nameless and dateless, a proposition which, you say, 'must have come from the pen of Dr Marx himself.' Unfortunately, they did not. I never saw that address before I read it in the columns of *Fraser.*[10] It has evidently been indited by one of my adherents, but, at the same time, contains some loose phraseology I was not delighted to have fathered upon me.

Mazzini and Blanqui had never any 'correspondence' whatever with the General Council of the *International.* When the *International* was founded, some Italian workmen, partisans of Mazzini, and one Major Wolff (whom papers, detected at the time of the Paris Commune, have proved to have been a police spy, in the regular pay of the Bonapartist *préfet de police),* his agent, became members of the General Council. Wolff proposed an Inaugural Address and Rules which, it was known, had been written by Mazzini. Both documents being rejected, and those drawn up by me being accepted, Mazzini, soon after, induced his partisans to secede from the General Council, and remained, from that time to his death, the most irreconcilable enemy of the International.

Orsini[11] (the brother of the Italian patriot) was never present at the sittings of the General Council and never gave it any account, interesting or otherwise, of any subject whatever. He had some private correspondence with me, relating to his doings in the U. States.

Potter was never a member of the 'International'. Hales was not present at the Basle Congress,[12] etc.

I have the honour, Sir,

To be yours most respectfully,

Karl Marx