---
id: MECW45-178
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 24, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 July 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Ramsgate, 24 July 1877

Dear Moor,

Newspapers, etc., received. Very many thanks. Your plan does at any rate have the advantage of killing quite a lot of birds with one stone; I can only hope that the chief one, your liver, won't suffer accordingly/ Still, with so many medical authorities in favour, there's not much one can really say against it from that viewpoint either. Who knows whether this time Neuenahr won't do you more good than Karlsbad?[1] It's simply a lottery, *espérons le mieux}*[2] For essential needs enclosed CHEQUE for *£101.3.7*—the non-round sum is intentional! At all events you really ought to come here for a few days and bring Hirsch with you if it can be managed. The change of air will do you good. By the way, I had thought of coming up to London once again for a day before 12 August, but don't let yourself be put off by such uncertainties.

What Hirsch has to say about France is very encouraging, particularly just now, even when one allows for some exaggera- tion. It's excellent that he should be giving a good account of himself. High time that a few people, at least, gave a good account of themselves when so many are turning into fools and ragamuf- fins.

The *Zukunft's* estimable letter returned herewith. One in identical terms has been forwarded to me from London.[3]

I think my reply will be as follows: firstly, it's impossible to agree to contributes» to a scientific periodical with editors that are anonymous and contributors likewise unnamed. Congress resolu- tions, however unexceptionable they may be in the field of practical agitation, count for nothing in that of science, nor do they suffice to establish a periodical's scientific nature — something that cannot be decreed.[4] A socialist scientific periodical without a quite definite scientific line is an absurdity and, given the present epidemic in Germany of diverse and indefinite lines, there has so far been no guarantee whatsoever that the line to be adopted will suit us.— Secondly, however, after finishing the Dühring,[5] I shall have to confine myself to my own independent work and shan't therefore have the time. What do you think of it? There's no hurry.

You will see from the enclosed letter from Liebknecht, which I would like to have back so that I can answer it,[6] that Mr Dühring 'couldn't tarry till the hour of twelve had struck'[7] and has been the cause of his own undoing.[8] All this was, of course, the fruit of silly Wilhelm's sagacity, and such is his childish glee that he doesn't even notice how much 'the party' has been discredited as a result. What is one to do with people like these? On top of that the man is still quite proud of his articles on France in which he simply endorses Hasenclever's nonsense.[9] However we'd better wait and see whether all the jubilation over Dühring's downfall doesn't fizzle out again.

The Russian moves are extremely bold, but what good will they do anyone if the Turks' conduct of the war remains as it has been for the past four weeks? The right course was to march on the Russian flank with a combined force from Shumla and Rustchuk[10] and smite it. They now *have* the best pass in the Balkans (the Shipka) which they can easily hold and, according to today's news, the Turks are sending troops from Shumla via Jamboli[11] to Rumelia in order to display themselves to the Russians there, instead of transferring the troops from Rumelia—the Adriano- ple[12] garrison excepted — to Shumla and attacking Sistova[13] with all available forces. The Turkish leadership *has* clearly allowed itself to be intimidated and has blundered accordingly. Moreover, it has everywhere abandoned the *now ripe* harvest to the Russians who therefore have enough to eat. Abdul Kerim has allowed the Turkish army to run so much to seed that more than 20% are in hospital, while the *Kölnische Zeitung's* Prussian lieutenant says that in Shumla he saw crowds of Turkish officers (not men) drunk on spirits. And all as a result of inaction. It drives one wild to see such a magnificent position and such splendid fighting material go to waste like this. All the same the Russians won't get to Constantinople, nor will they find it so easy to deny even the Turks in the quadrilateral of fortresses[14] their supplies of food. Moreover, they have only two months left in which to force a decision and hence, despite all the follies of the Turks, this year's campaign has already as good as failed—were unpredictability not the rule out there! The despatch of British troops will probably be enough to prevent the Sultan[15] from concluding a separate peace, and that's what's good about it.

Lizzie is doing better. She went through a serious crisis on Sunday[16] and now seems to be gradually recovering.

Best wishes to everyone,

Your

F. E.