---
id: MECW45-005
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Blos, February 21, 1874"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "21 February 1874"
year: 1874
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Bolshevik,* No. 13, Moscow, 1932 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM BLOS

IN LEIPZIG

London, 21 February 1874

Dear Friend Bios,

Things received with thanks. I enclose the article on the English elections.[1] The first of a series on the Military Law[2] will follow in a few days; the second[3] as soon as I have obtained a copy of Moltke's speech.

Jacoby's conduct is irresponsible.^9 If he did not wish to take up his seat he should have requested the Party Committee in advance just to put him forward as a mere 'name' in completely hopeless constituencies. The workers have neither the money nor the time to squander on empty gestures of this sort. The most strenuous efforts will be needed to get Bracke in, and victory there is doubly important since it is in a *rural* constituency. Jacoby has disqualified himself for good with this. The man is just *too much of a sage.* And his reasons are so trivial and vulgar-democratic! He hurls abuse at *force* as something reprehensible in itself, even though we all know that, when it comes down to it, nothing can be achieved without force. If Lob Sonnemann had written such things, that would not be so bad, or Karl Mayer of the *Schwäbischer Beobachter*—but a candidate of our party! However, it is a good thing that he has reduced himself to the level of a mere 'name'.

And in fact it is all very fine and logical: on the one hand, he rejects *force,* on the other, parliamentary *legal* action—what is left then but pure Bakuninist abstention?

Yours in friendship,

F. E.

Liebknecht's letter arrived yesterday.