---
id: MECW45-272
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 10, 1879"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 September 1879"
year: 1879
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA*, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

Ramsgate, 10 September 1879

62 Plains of Waterloo

DEAR FRED,

Yesterday I got a note from Kovalevsky saying he had had a letter from Russia which necessitated his immediate return to the land of his birth. He didn't send me the *Jahrbuch.*

Laura spent a week with us, and Paul a few days every now and again; the day before yesterday he returned with her to London. Laura, by the by, had let Pumptia know she was leaving.

My wife is still making very slow progress; I have got much better.[1] The air down here suits me extraordinarily well. Besides, I was kept in *mouvement perpétuel*[2] by Laura.

Herewith the letters received from you today.[3] (The others will go off at the same time, but under separate cover.) Liebknecht has no discernment. The letters prove what they are intended to refute, namely our original view that the business was bungled in Leipzig, whereas the men in Zurich proceeded in accordance with the terms prescribed for them.[4] Incidentally, their HORROR at the attack made by the otherwise so innocuous *Laterne* on that scoundrel Kayser[5] shows more clearly than anything else what is the calibre of these chaps. Schramm, though a sound man in other respects, has always been a philistine. The Leipzigers for their part are already so 'parliamentarily minded' that they regard criticism of one member of their Reichstag coterie as a *crime de lèse majesté.*

I altogether agree with your view that no further time should be lost in stating our views, *forcibly* and *ruthlessly,* as to the *Jahrbuch* bunkum,'[6] i.e. *pro nunc*[7]presenting' it to the Leipzigers in black and white. Should they proceed to go ahead with their 'party organ' in this way, we shall have to disavow them *publicly.* In such matters, the line has to be drawn somewhere.

I haven't replied to Most,[8] nor shall I do so; as soon as I'm in London I shall write, inviting him to turn up in person. You ought to be present at the meeting.

The most typical thing about Bismarck is the way in which he came to be at odds with Russia. He wanted Gorchakov removed and Shuvalov put in his place. Since this miscarried, the obvious conclusion was—*voilà l'ennemi!*[9] And you may be pretty sure that Bücher did not fail to exacerbate his master's irritation. *On retourne toujours à son premier amour.*[10] From the point of view of our movement and of Europe generally, nothing could be more injurious than the implementation of Bismarck's plan. So long as old William[11] is alive, this won't be so easy; it might always happen that Bismarck himself falls victim to the reaction he sparked off with the Anti-Socialist Law.[12] *En attendant,*[13] the black cloud in the east is already doing him a service; once again he is the 'man they need' and the liberals now feel it to be their 'patriotic' duty to kiss his arse. Not only will the iron military budget be renewed at the next sitting of the Reichstag; it might be 'perpetuated', as William originally wished. The secret of Russian diplomacy's success ABROAD was the deathly silence OF RUSSIA AT HOME, the spell being broken by the movement in that country. Its final victory was the Treaty of Paris of 1856.[14] Since then, nothing but blunders.

I HOPE POOR SCHOLLYMEYER'S HEALTH WILL IMPROVE. MY BEST WISHES FOR HIM.

Your

Moor