---
id: MECW45-276
title: "Letter to Johann Philipp Becker, September 15, 1879"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "15 September 1879"
year: 1879
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, *Vergessene Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becher),* Berlin, 1920 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-E"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 15 September 1879

Dear Old Man,

I trust you got my last letter[1] and the money order for 75 frs by post.

Sorge writes saying that he has written to you, too, about the necessity of renewing the power of attorney in respect of Lingenau's will, since Geib's death might otherwise put the lawyers of the contending party into the position of being able to declare the old power of attorney invalid and thus bring about new delays.[2]

Marx, who is still at the seaside[3] and has apparently made a wonderful recovery, has just written telling me to ask you to send him the form for the power of attorney[4] so that he can attend to the same. Would you therefore be so good as to do this as soon as possible. If it involves you in any expense, write and tell me at once what it amounts to and I will send you the money. The sooner this is done the better. The power of attorney should, of course, be exactly the same as before, only omitting Geib's name, or else mentioning him as deceased.

The business of the German party organ in Zurich[5] is becoming more and more of a lark. The Zurich editorial committee which, under the general management of the Leipzigers, is to supervise and censor the paper, consists of Höchberg, Schramm and Bernstein. But now, in the *Jahrbuch für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik,* published in Zurich by Höchberg, Schramm, Höchberg and Bernstein have printed an article 'Rückblick auf die sozialistische Bewegung in Deutschland'[6] in which all three are revealed to be common or garden bourgeois and pacific philanthropists; they accuse the party of having been too exclusively a ''*workers' party',* and of having provoked the hatred of the bourgeoisie, and claim that leadership of the movement should be entrusted to 'educated' bourgeois of their own stamp. That's really going a bit too far.

Luckily Höchberg dropped in on me unexpectedly the day before yesterday, whereupon I gave him a piece of my mind. The unfortunate lad—not a bad chap, *au fond,*[7] but alarmingly naive—came down to earth with a bang when I pointed out to him that we couldn't think of lowering the proletarian flag which we had held aloft for nigh on 40 years, still less join in the general petty-bourgeois fraternisation fantasies against which we had been fighting, again for nigh on 40 years. In short, now he at last knows where he stands with us and also why, whatever the Leipzigers may say or do, we can't march shoulder to shoulder with people of his ilk.

We shall likewise supply Bebel with a quite categorical statement as to our standpoint vis-à-vis these allies of the German party,[8] and then wait and see what they will do. If the party organ adopts the standpoint of the said bourgeois article, we shall publicly declare our opposition to it. However, they're unlikely to let things go so far.

Write soon, then. Warmest regards from Marx and

Your old friend,