---
id: MECW45-120
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Bracke, November 6, 1876"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 November 1876"
year: 1876
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE

IN BRUNSWICK

London, 6 November 1876 Dear Bracke,

I have been comparing Grunzig's translation—first sheet—most scrupulously with the original[1] and am about to inform him that I *cannot* accept his services.

In fact, to correct it (an *occasional* correction will doubtless be necessary with any translator) would take more time than if I were to translate it myself from start to finish. But I haven't the time for that. I cannot again go through the painful experience I endured in connection with the French translation of *Capital.*[2]

I'd be glad to have Kokosky, but he entirely lacks the deftness, the lightness of touch, which is precisely what the translation of this book needs.

I have already taken soundings in another quarter[3] but doubt whether the person in question will have the time. Meanwhile, it would be as well for you to cast round if possible for a professional translator in Leipzig. Since the book in question is not intended purely for working-class readers, it would be foolish to go and look for a translator specifically within a party that is not well endowed with literary talent, i.e. to proceed from the outset on the assumption that the translator *must* be a party man.

From what I hear, B. Becker has found a publisher in Switzerland.[4]

Yours sincerely,

K. M.

The *conciliation congress in Berne*—Engels and I wrote and told Liebknecht *the moment* we heard of the Germans' intention to send their delegates to it—is, and has been from the start, nothing but a Bakuninist intrigue.[5] What is more, proof of this reached us a few days ago from Portugal/ More anon.