---
id: MECW45-010
title: "Letter to Jenny Longuet, between April 20 and 24, 1874"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "20 April 1874"
year: 1874
publication: "First published in *Annali,* an. 1, Milano, 1958 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET[1]

IN LONDON

[Ramsgate, between 20 and 24 April 1874]

Dear Jennychen,

I am sending the *épreuves^a* today. Please let me have them back after Longuet has looked through them. I shall then make a definitive version of the copy to be sent to Paris.[2]

Today was the first day I have been able to do even the slightest amount of work. Up to now, despite baths, walks, marvellous air, care with my diet, etc., my condition was even worse than in London. Proof that the matter had reached a crisis point and that it was high time for me to disappear. For the same reason I am delaying my return, for it is absolutely vital for me to be *fit for work* when I come back. Engels' letter,[3] saying that he is arriving today, reminds me of one of the reasons, I SUPPOSE, for your not coming. How is your health? I am convinced that a few weeks at the SEASIDE would restore you completely. At present it is in fact more pleasant and soothing than during the actual season.

I hope that my darling Putty^b will still recognise me. Tell Tussychen that the 'SACRED MUSIC'—*sacrée musique,* as she translated it—was not actually known by this name among the frivolous Parisians, but that what it referred to had come from Italy, where they have always turned the Divine into a comedy, and was known as **concerts spirituels***^1* in Diderot's day.

*Pour la bonne bouche^c* Grimm retells the following witticism of the Chevalier de Bouffiers:

'Les princes ont plus besoin d'être divertis qu'adorés; il n'y a *que Dieu qui ait un assez grand fonds de gaieté* pour ne pas s'ennuyer de tous les hommages qu'on lui rend,*^d*

*Adieu,* my darling.

Your

O L D NicK^e

^a proofs (of the French edition of the first volume of *Capital)* - ^b nickname of Charles, first-born of Jenny Longuet - ^c As a final titbit - ^d 'Princes would rather be distracted than worshipped; *only God has a sense of humour great enough* to prevent him from being bored by all the homage he receives.' See F. M. Grimm, *Correspondance littéraire, philosophique et critique de Grimm et de Diderot, depuis 1753 jusqu'en 1790,* Vol. 7, Paris, 1829, p. 449. - ^e jocular name for Marx