---
id: MECW45-299
title: "Letter to Carl Hirsch, June 8, 1878"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: "Eleanor Marx"
written: "8 June 1878"
year: 1878
publication: "First published in the language of the original (French) in *Society for the Study of Labour History,* Bulletin No. 8, Leeds, 1964 Printed according to the original Translated from the French Publishe"
status: raw
---

ELEANOR MARX TO CARL HIRSCH

IN PARIS

London, 8 June 1878[1]

Dear Mr Hirsch,

I owe you my excuses for having neglected to reply to your kind letter and trust that you won't take it too much amiss. To begin with, I have been suffering from neuralgia for the past few weeks, as well as from bouts of atrocious toothache—and, if you have ever had toothache, you will understand my lack of inclination to write. Next, I am working just now for several literary societies (CHAUCER SOCIETY, SHAKESPEARE SOCIETY, PHILOLOGICAL SOCIETY etc.) at the BRITISH MUSEUM and this work leaves me very little time.[2] Finally, I was so ashamed of my idleness that I no longer dared write. Today, however, I have taken my courage in both hands, for Papa has instructed me to drop you a line on his behalf. He is very unwell at the moment and in his present state of health it is *impossible* for him to let you have anything for your journal.[3] He has, I think, been working too hard latterly and will be absolutely forced to do nothing for some time. I feel sure you will excuse him and that you will tell this to your colleagues on the *Egalité.*

I must thank you for asking me to collaborate on your journal, but at the moment I cannot—every bit of my day is taken up with work at the MUSEUM.

What do you make of Nobiling? 4 0 6 Do you know anything about the man? The English press is indignant—more so, perhaps, than the German. One can see how delighted they would be to lay everything at the door of socialists of all countries, so as to resume their persecution. They are delighted that Germany is about to have a bit of reaction and terrorism—if only they could treat themselves to a bit of that over here! I fear it will be a bad business for our friends Liebknecht and the others. A little persecution can be beneficial, but not reaction, which suppresses newspapers, MEETINGS—in other words every means of propaganda. As yet we know nothing definite about Nobiling, for one cannot believe the reactionary press. The effect here was overwhelming when news of the second attempt at assassination came through—nothing but cries of indignation on all sides, cries made more indignant by the fact that the bourgeois are terribly afraid. So if you know anything about Nobiling, write and tell us.

We have seen Mr Zanardelli once or twice. Is he not a little bit of a hothead? I didn't see him long enough to judge, but that is how he struck me.

Lissa[garay] has left for Jersey—before his departure he asked me to send you his best compliments. Papa also sends you a cordial handshake, likewise to Kaub.

Shall we see you soon in London? You really ought to come and spend a few days here.

Yours sincerely,

Eleanor Marx