---
id: MECW45-230
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 17, 1878"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "17 September 1878"
year: 1878
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LITTLEHAMPTON

[London,] 17 September 1878

DEAR FRED, I am writing this letter before going to your house (it is still very early); should I find a letter for you there, I shall send it under separate cover.

The news from Malvern is much better so that it won't be necessary for me to go there; but for safety's sake the doctor is now calling regularly every day; I had already suggested as much to my wife so as to prevent their constantly flying into needless

[1][2]

PANICS on the one hand and neglecting necessary precautions on the other; but she and above all Jennychen foolishly objected, not wishing, as they said, to add 'needlessly' to the already enormous doctors' BILLS in Malvern. Now they realise that I was right. I had similarly prescribed a regular drive at the best time of day, whenever the child's[3] condition permitted. This, too, has now been endorsed by the doctor. These drives are Jennychen's only recreation and, for my wife—whose cure has been seriously impaired by the continual TROUBLES with the child—the only means of combatting these influences which are so detrimental to her health. So long as I remained there,[4] I saw to it that this was done.

Mr Eulenburg *(vide* PAPERS OF TODAY)'[5] will not, for his part, be carrying any coals to Newcastle.[6] Anything more pitiful than the EXTRACT—quintessence—of his SPEECH I have yet to see. Stolberg, too, is good. The purpose of the exceptional law[7] is to deprive the Social-Democratic movement of every vestige of legality. *Probatum est^ Mettre hors la loi*[8] has, from time immemorial, been an infallible means of making anti-government movements 'illegal', and protecting the government from the law—*la légalité nous tue.*[9] Reichensperger represents the Rhenish bourgeois of the Centre.[10] Bamberger adheres faithfully to 'We are but dogs!'.[11]

Bebel has clearly made an impression.[12] (See *Daily News* OF TO-DAY.)

It's a good beginning. According to various English newspapers our friend Kovalevsky has been shot in Odessa; they spell his name thus—Kowalsky. The FAT BOY, who came to see me on Sunday,^6 told me a very choice anecdote. Before his departure, sundry 'diplomatic' aspirants amongst his Moscow students had to sit an examination. They included a number of laddies much older than himself, notably Montenegrins, who were being given an academic training at the expense of the RUSSIAN *ASIATIC* (DIPLOMATIC) *DEPARTMENT.* These laddies are distinguished by their DENSENESS and advanced age, as once the country bumpkins at our grammar school in Trier, who were preparing to enter the seminary (Catholic) and most of them drawing stipends.

Although marks (for university examinations) in Russia run from 0 to 5, Kovalevsky awarded only two lots of marks—4 for

[13][14]

those who knew nothing at all and 5 for those who knew something. During the last examinations he was approached by one of his students, a long, lanky Montenegrin of 32, who said: 'You must award me a 5; I know that I don't know anything, but on the other hand I know that, if I get "another" 4, the ASIATIC DEPARTMENT will send me packing back to Montenegro; *so that's why* you must award me a 5.' Needless to say, he failed his examination with flying colours, since Kovalevsky—as, indeed, he had told him—could see NO NECESSITY for his continued residence in Moscow.

The oddest part of it is—or so Kovalevsky says—that all these laddies from Montenegro become imbued while in Moscow with a fanatical hatred of the Russians. They naively told him as much themselves, the alleged reason being that 'the Russians IN GENERAL, and Russian students in particular, tell us we're barbarians and blockheads and treat us as such'. Hence the Russian government achieves precisely the opposite of what it intended with its 'benefactions'.

What used to be a private joke of ours, namely that it's the Russian socialists who commit the 'atrocities' for which the 'law-abiding' German Social-Democrats are to be put *hors la loi,* has been adduced in all seriousness by the fatuous Stolberg.[15]

Only he forgot to add that, alongside those 'atrocities', there exists in Russia a 'state of law' which is the ideal if unattainable goal aimed at by that squireen Bismarck's bill.

The fact that the Russians, with the support of Prussia and Austria, are yet again seeking 'European mediation' is a highly significant symptom.

*Adio.* I trust that you are recovering in Littlehampton from your recent shock. Love from Tussy and Lenchen.

Your

Moor