---
id: MECW45-090
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 25, 1876"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 July 1876"
year: 1876
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Ramsgate,[1] 25 July 1876

11 Camden Square

Dear Moor,

Have written to Lafargue asking him to let us know what day he is arriving, Friday or Saturday.[2]

Herewith Wilhelm's[3] letter with enclosure by Most. You see what sort of people they are—both of them. Take Wilhelm's portentous attitude to the 'attempts at a rapprochement'.[4] As though one—that is anyone—could become involved with canaille who have been convicted of such treason! And as though any kind of rapprochement could lead to anything! What is supposed to happen when they have effected it? If, circumstances being what they are and the situation what it is, these people want to resume the role of the International, LET THEM PLEASE THEMSELVES AND BAD MANNERS TO THEM!

The COLLAPSE of the Serbs is stupendous.[5] The campaign was intended to set the whole of Turkey in flames, and everywhere the tinder is damp—Montenegro has betrayed the campaign for her own private ends, Bosnia has absolutely no intention of rebelling now that Serbia proposes to liberate her, and the worthy Bulgarians aren't lifting a finger. The Serbian army of liberation is having to live at its own expense and, after a swashbuckling offensive, withdraw into its robber's lair without having been seriously defeated anywhere.— No doubt that will also serve as a lesson to the Romanians, in which case the Russian plans will be pretty well in the soup.

For the rest, I console myself here with Dühring's philosophy[6] — never before has anyone written such arrant rubbish. Windy platitudes—nothing more, interspersed with utter drivel, but the whole thing dressed up, not without skill, for a public with which the author is thoroughly familiar—a public that wants by means of beggar's soup[7] and little effort to lay down the law about everything. The man is as if cut out for the socialism and philosophy of the milliards era.[8]

Your

F. E.