---
id: MECW45-236
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 24, 1878"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 September 1878"
year: 1878
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA*, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN LITTLEHAMPTON

[London,] 24 September 1878

DEAR FRED,

Herewith a scrawl from Liebknecht;[2] I opened the letter because I thought it might contain news of the party which would perhaps call for immediate action on our part.

I should be grateful if you would send back Lavrov's letter by return; it arrived today and has not yet been answered. The only interesting thing about it is the passage relating to Wrôblewski,— probably correct, as it is in keeping with his temperament as *homme d'action*[3] and is, moreover, *plus ou moins*[4] confirmed by his silence where we are concerned.

After the opening of the Reichstag, I received the Bill submitted to the same by the government, together with the preamble;'[5] yesterday, from the same quarter (Bracke) I likewise received the stenographic report of the Reichstag sittings of 16 and 17 September.[6] One has little conception—even at this stage—either of the AVERAGE Prussian minister's stupidity and his master's[7]ingenuity', or of the nastiness of his hangers-on, the representa- tives of the true-blue German bourgeoisie—until one sees before one the stenographic report of this, its most recent manifestation. I am to some extent occupied in making extracts from it for the English press, but I'm not yet sure whether it's quite what I want for *The Daily News.*[8]

The Russians' ploy in Afghanistan,[9] like the INCIDENTS in Turkey—all this is of little interest to me now except in so far as it provides *argumentum ad hominem*[10] in regard to European statecraft. I am, besides, convinced that nothing Russia, and Prussia INTO THE BARGAIN, can now do on the international stage can have other than pernicious consequences for their regime, nor can it delay the latter's downfall, but only expedite its violent end.

My wife, Jennychen and Johnny arrived here safe and sound on Friday[11] afternoon and the whole company took up quarters with us until yesterday evening when Jennychen removed, lock, stock and barrel, to Leighton Grove[12] so as to be there to receive Longuet. But the big man won't be arriving till this evening. The child is much better and, miraculously enough, Jennychen also recovered somewhat during the last few days of her stay in Malvern.

Yesterday old Petzler called in with a letter from a parson[13] who edits a magazine, also DABBLES IN SOCIALISM and wants SOME INFORMATION from me.[14] Meanwhile Bismarck has again succeeded in placing socialism à *l'ordre du jour*[15] so that even *la haute politique*[16] is in consequence *plus ou moins* lost from view.

Hoping that Mother Nature is assisting your recovery, and with love from Tussy, Jennychen and my wife.

Your

Moor