---
id: MECW45-169
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Bracke, May 26, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 May 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1934 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE

IN BRUNSWICK

[London,] 26 May 1877

Dear Bracke,

What Miss Kurz has been awaiting has today gone off from London. In the course of next week she will (save, I think, for the appendix) be getting *everything* in the way of alterations which Lissagaray still has to send her.[1]

For the rest I should like to point out that:

1. *La* Kurz should have sent you, *as a matter of course,* anything *in manuscript form she had received from Lissagaray,* along with *her own manuscript.* Considering the masterly way she translates (see just a *few* recent examples overleaf), how can I keep a check on her without Lissagaray's ms.? I am convinced that, because of this, all manner of infelicities have already crept in.

2. She might very well have told herself that Lissagaray requires this ms. for his own second French edition.

All in all, the translation, when not actually wrong, is often unhelpful, philistine and wooden. But this may, perhaps, to some extent correspond to German taste. With kind regards,

Yours,

K. M.

I should be grateful if you would insist that the said Kurz should, *firstly,* send you (for return to Lissagaray) that part of Lissagaray's ms. she has already translated (you can pass it on to me together with the proofs) and, *secondly,* always enclose with her own manuscript the manuscript she has just translated so that I may compare translation and original. All in all this additional manuscript does not amount to very much.

*The passage* heavily scored by me on *p. 73* should read thus:

'It [the people] looked for this emancipation to the autonomous Commune which,etc., etc., would conduct its administration independently, within the limits required to maintain national unity. Rather than the representative who may,etc., should, etc., it opposed to that monarchical excrescence of society, the "State", which, etc., undermines, etc., represents particular class interests which, etc., the delegation of communes endowed with a life of their own which, etc., was to administer the general national interests.'

*Examples p. 49 'A l'appel de son nom il a voulu répondre'* Miss Kurz translates as: 'He wanted to respond to the summons issued to him.' Sheer rubbish! It means: 'He wished to answer when his name was called, etc'

*{ditto 'les yeux*... *brillants de foi républicaine'; foi* does not here mean 'troth'—nor does it ever mean that, save in the sense of 'upon my troth!' *(ma foi)*—but *faith, conviction,* etc. I have left it as it stands since I am generally averse to all such commonplaces in German; so what matter if she puts an X for a U.}

*p. 51 'des intrigants bourgeois qui couraient après la deputation'.* Kurz translates 'who ran after the deputation'. A primary school child could hardly translate worse.

*p. 51 'pour statuer en cas de doubles nominations'*
Kurz translates outrageously 'so as, if need be,' (what's that supposed to mean?) 'to decree double nominations'!!! Should read: 'so as to decide in the case of double nominations'.

*p. 54 'une permanence'* is translated as 'permanent session' (what the devil is that?). Means 'standing committee'.

*p. 59* instead of 'expired bills of exchange' she puts 'expired *merchandise** *****(III). p. 70 'l'intelligence etc. de la bourgeoisie de cette époque**
she translates as 'the big bourgeois *of this point of time'* (!). An epoch is no more a *point* of time than a line is a *point* in space.

*p. 75 'C'est que la première note est juste'* she translates as: 'The reason was that *the first account* (!) was correct', should read, that from the start they had struck or hit the right note.

*p. 90 'plumitifs'*—'quill-pushers' she translates as *legal recordslll*