---
id: MECW45-181
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 31, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "31 July 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und* K. *Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collecte"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

[Ramsgate,] 31 July 1877
2 Adelaide Gardens

Dear Moor,

Just a couple of lines in great haste enclosing letter from W. Liebknecht which might perhaps influence your reply to the *Zukunft*[2] I haven't yet sent a straight answer, but have written to Liebknecht about the oddity of expecting us to entrust our manuscripts to totally anonymous persons because a congress has conferred a scientific character on them.^3'^4 I further told him that

I would write articles only in exceptional cases and when I myself considered it imperative.[3]

Wilhelm himself obviously doesn't know how things stand— otherwise he couldn't have made such a howler about Wiede. A fine way of setting up a scientific journal! Anyhow, it's a good thing there isn't any Dühringianism.

I was delighted by the business of the strike in America.[4] The way they throw themselves into the movement has no equivalent on this side of the ocean. Only twelve years since slavery was abolished and already the movement has got to such a pitch!

*Knies*[5] is capital. Dühring, too, concerning whom you have again hit the nail on the head. What he ultimately says, in fact,— translated from confusion into economics — is that value is determined by wages.[6]

Doubtless one will have to resign oneself to the Russians remaining between the Balkans and the Danube until the autumn. The Turks have allowed a very large proportion of their regular troops to succumb for want of proper provisioning during the fighting in Serbia and Montenegro,[7] and Abdul Kerim has done his best to finish off the rest. I doubt whether Mehemet Ali has more than 50,000 men capable of an offensive; Osman Pasha will have some 25,000 and another 25,000 south of the Balkans; that would seem to be all, the remainder being untrained militia of no use in the field. Provided the Turkish government doesn't now conclude a premature peace, the Russians will not get to Constantinople this year, but probably cross the Danube again in November and, not having yet made any impression on the fortresses which—barring accidents—are therefore likely to con- tinue secure throughout this campaign, they can start from the beginning again in the spring—if at all.

The wretched *Standard* correspondent in Constantinople is, at Layard's behest, disseminating alarmist rumours in order that the English fleet may be imposed on the Turks.

Your

F. E.