---
id: MECW45-297
title: "Letter to Carl Hirsch, November 25, 1876"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: "Eleanor Marx"
written: "25 November 1876"
year: 1876
publication: "First published in the language of the original (French) in *Society for the Study of Labour History,* Bulletin No. 8, Leeds, 1964 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Work"
status: raw
---

ELEANOR MARX TO CARL HIRSCH

IN PARIS

[London,] 25 November 1876

41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

For several weeks past I have been on the point of writing to you — I have actually started a letter on several occasions, but one thing and another always prevents my finishing it.

Just now in particular I have little time, since I am very busy with the election for the 'SCHOOL BOARD'. This committee, which is entrusted with the management of the public schools and with compulsory instruction, is a pretty important one and is chiefly concerned with combatting the so-called 'CHURCH PARTY' which seeks the outright abolition of compulsory instruction. I am working to promote the candidature of a woman—a MRS Westlake—who, though essentially bourgeois like almost all Englishwomen, is at any rate very much a free thinker and worth more than any of the men who are offering themselves as candidates. I go from house to house canvassing votes and you would never believe the comical things I see and hear. At one house they demanded that we teach 'religion above all'—at another I was informed that 'instruction is the curse of the country, that education will be the ruin of us', etc., etc. All in all it is amusing, but also sad at times,when you call on a workman who tells you that he would like to 'consult his employer' first.

We receive the *Révolution*[1] every day. What do you make of it? Can it long survive? I have my doubts about it. Tell us what you think.

Next week you will have a visit from Mr Kistemaeckers—the publisher of Lissagaray's book[2] — a very good, very honest man. He is going to Paris to introduce the book in Paris and nothing should be said about his visit for fear of alerting the police.

Papa (who for the past few weeks has been very unwell on account of a heavy cold and bronchitis) is very vexed at not having had any news from Paris. As you know, he sent a case of instalments to Paris, hoping to receive in exchange sewn copies of the book—and not only has he received nothing, he hasn't even had any news. If you know anything about this, please let him know, I beg you, dear Sir.

But I see I have come to the end of my paper. So I shall bid you adieu for today. I told you in my last letter how well my pince-nez suits me—-I grow more delighted with it every day.

Many good wishes from everyone here to Kaub, as also to yourself

and

Believe me,

Yours very sincerely,

Eleanor Marx