---
id: MECW45-091
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 26, 1876"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 July 1876"
year: 1876
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN RAMSGATE

[London,] 26 July[1] 1876

DEAR FRED,

SEASIDE or no SEASIDE, you must recall that you did not leave till last Monday;[2] moreover, according to the RELICTS living at No. 122,[3] you will both of you be returning in the middle or at the end of this week (or so I was informed only yesterday).[4] As for *last week,* Laura (and I accompanied her, as my wife had written to say she was very unwell) spent the second part of it in Brighton (Lafargue came down on Saturday and returned with myself and Laura on Sunday); Longuet and Jennychen, however, were still SCHOOLBOUND.[5] The Lafargues will be coming down to Ramsgate this *Friday* or *Saturday,* and will return on Sunday, since Lafargue cannot interrupt his BUSINESS[6] and Laura has to resume her teaching on Monday. The only week she will have off is *the last week in August.* (She has got to make up this week for the one day she missed last week, which, in this heat, is far from agreeable.)

I shall pass on the contents of your letter[7] to the other members of the family.

My wife was still very unwell when we arrived, and slightly better when we left her. As soon as she feels fit enough she will certainly wish to spend a few days in Ramsgate. During the *next day or two* Lenchen will be completely taken up with the preparations for Tussy's trip.[8]

We were told in Brighton that Madame Bravo used to be a ballet dancer and Madame Cox her DRESSMAKER. During my wife's stay in Brighton, Mrs Bravo gave GREAT PUBLIC *(plus ou moins)[9]* DINNER PARTIES there.

In the last *Bnepedz!* there's a disgustingly sycophantic article about Bakunin's funeral,[10] at which Guillaume, Brousse, the two Reclus and *l'illustre[11] * Cafiero were the chief ACTORS. Bakunin is depicted therein as the 'giant' of the Revolution. We are promised a sequel by the same correspondent on the subject of the plans put forward after the funeral for a coalition between the two Internationals, namely the Jurassians who want a **FREE FEDERATION** of workers, and the Germans who aspire to a **People's State** [*Volksstaat].* To achieve this, it was said, all that was needed was to reframe Article 3 of the Rules in accordance with the version adopted at the 'Congress of 1873' (Guillaume's congress).[12] In a short paragraph in the *Volksstaat* (I don't know whether you've read it yet) Liebknecht declares that nobody could desire this more than we (i.e. he); but, incorrigible TALKER that he is, goes on to say: 'Let us see deeds instead of words'.[13] Naturally, he is gratified that Mr Guillaume should proclaim the 'People's State' the be-all and end-all of the non-Bakuninist International. Lavrov clearly considers it a good BUSINESS MANOEUVRE to accept Bakuninist articles, thus also committing that PARTY to his paper.

The Brighton AQUARIUM has really come into its own since the time (three years ago) when I witnessed its beginnings.[14] In accordance with the compromise it has reached with PARSON POWER, it now stays open on Sunday afternoons (until the evening), but on the arid condition that the poor devils of EXCURSIONISTS shall not obtain a drop of liquid, not even undistilled water. You ought to go and have a look at it one of these days.

Love to the whole FAMILY and kind regards to Madame Pauli.^a

Your

Moor