---
id: MECW45-214
title: "Letter to Carl Hirsch, April 3, 1878"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 April 1878"
year: 1878
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO CARL HIRSCH

IN PARIS

London, 3 April 1878

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Hirsch,

Would you be so kind as to forward the enclosed note,[1] to Lopatin? We don't know whether the old address we have for him still holds good.[2] It has to do with an article for Bracke's *Kalender* on the condemned Russians.[3] —The *Égalité* hasn't been arriving for some time past; I hope nothing has happened to it. With the suspension of the *Bulletin jurassien*[4] for want of money, the Bakuninists' swaggering has come to an inglorious end. It's encouraging to see the movement growing so powerful that it can sweep aside every one of these rubbishy factions without undue difficulty. As soon as I have a complete set of them here I shall send you some articles of mine on the movement in 1877,[5] which have appeared in the New York *Labor Standard.* As regards Dühring, I've all but finished now. No doubt you will shortly see something more about his 'socialism' in the *Vorwärts.*[6] This worthy man has cost me an atrocious amount of time, but unfortunately there was no [alternative], it being a case of all or nothing. Precious chaps, these anarchists! That great enemy of the state, Adhémar Schwitzguébel, Guillaume's right-hand man, who would rather chop off his own hand than place a voting-paper in a ballot box, is an officer *dans l'armée fédérale*[7] as the *Bulletin jurassien* itself declares. Kindest regards to all our friends, especially Kaub and Mesa.

Yours very sincerely,

F. E.