---
id: MECW45-285
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, November 14, 1879"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 November 1879"
year: 1879
publication: "First published in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the original"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 14 November 1879
41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sorge,

I am at last able to send you all the powers of attorney.[1] I didn't get the others until the end of the week before last; they arrived when *I was confined to the house* by a most INFAMOUS cold and then, after that, my worthy SOLICITOR contrived to spin out the affair for another week, and only today did I finally receive *my* power of attorney. The account both for these and the first one will be sent to you later. The other 3 (or rather 4) powers of attorney will go off to you at the same time as this letter—but under separate cover.

You will doubtless have got my letter[2] in which I told you about the latest goings-on in the bosom of the party. Since then Höchberg and his associates[3] in Zurich have been *removed,* at least nominally, from the editorial committee which now sits in Leipzig, while Vollmar functions as editor in Zurich. His paper, *Der Sozialdemokrat,* isn't worth much. But at any rate all our associates worth mentioning, Liebknecht, Bebel, Bracke, etc., have disowned Dr Höchberg's, alias Richter's, *Jahrbuch,* though as yet only—in private.

You will have seen in the papers that the anti-communist gang, composed of very heterogeneous elements, was finally defeated at the Marseilles Congress.

My wife is still dangerously ill and I myself am not yet completely fit.

With kindest regards from my family.

Your

Karl Marx