---
id: MECW45-294
title: "Brief Account of Marx's Letters to Carl Hirsch, January 31, 1875 to February 20, 1878"
volume: 45
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "31 January 1875"
year: 1875
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, Moscow, 1964 Printed according to C. Hirsch's file from the archives of the Paris Prefecture of Police Translated from th"
status: raw
---

BRIEF ACCOUNT OF MARX'S LETTERS TO CARL HIRSCH[1]

IN PARIS

On 31 January 1875 K. Marx sends Hirsch a letter relating to the work *Misère de la Philosophie*[2] printed at his expense (1,500 copies) by a Mr Vogler, a publisher in Brussels. In this letter he says also that Vernouillet, who sends him letters, is a very sensible man; finally he asks him how long it is since he saw Freund and Mesa; the last address which he had for Freund was: 53, route de Versailles (Auteuil).

On 10 December 1875 Karl Marx, 41 Maitland Park Road, London, N. W., writes to Hirsch concerning his book *Le Capital,* speaks of Lachâtre in Vevey (Switzerland) and of Kaub.

On 16 February 1876 Karl Marx invites Hirsch to pay a visit to his good friend Lopatin, 25, rue Gay Lussac, and advises him to make his acquaintance.

On 4 May 1876 Karl Marx informs C. Hirsch that a certain Henri Oriol, 177, rue St Denis, an employee at the Lachâtre bookshop, has written to him that the *Rappel* asked him for a review of the work *Le Capital,* and Mr Oriol is asking me, Marx says, for an article about this work, a kind of key which could also serve as an introduction.[3]

K. Marx also asks for news of Kaub.

On 23 September 1876 K. Marx writes to Hirsch: The day before yesterday I came back from Karlsbad.[4] On my arrival I found a letter from Lavrov relating to the book *Le Capital,* the publication of which is to be banned in France, as he was told by his agent in Paris, Guyot of the Palais Royal.^3 He sends greetings from the Kaub family.

On 10 April 1877 Karl Marx asks Hirsch for information about the Galliffet and Madame de Beaumont affair.[5] He adds that the *Vorwärts* called Galliffet a 'dog'. He also asks him for the result of the scandalous trial of the 'simpleton' Louis Blanc (sic) against the Russian Panayev.

On 14 May 1877, in a letter to Hirsch, K. Marx speaks of *gens*[6] Kaub, hostile to the Tsar, whom he calls a 'Kindernhund',[7] child murderer.^D64 But the sentry protects him.

On 1 August 1877 K. Marx writes a socialist letter to Hirsch in which the names of Höchberg, Engels, Elisée Reclus and Arnould figure, and against the Protestant pastors of Germany.

On 20 February 1878 Karl Marx informs Hirsch that he has learnt from Lissagaray that a large number of people, supporters of the F. Pyat Commune, are working again to restore that harlequin Thiers who has done so much harm to the Commune; further on he says: Louis Blanc at least had the courage not to lick the boots of Mr Thiers as J. Favre, Simon, etc., did.

[8]