---
id: MECW45-249
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, March 1, 1879"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "1 March 1879"
year: 1879
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1929 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 1 March 1879

Dear Liebknecht,

We have again tried to come to an arrangement with *The Whitehall Review* through Barry, if only in regard to the Reichstag reports, but the jackass insisted on the articles being signed; so we had to give him a flat refusal and let him go. The negotiations lasted a pretty long time and, until matters had reached the stage of *oui ou non,*[1] there was, of course, nothing we could tell you.

The election in Breslau[2] has made a splendid impression here too. Still more, however, the speed with which Bismarck is ruining himself. He really is coming 'one cropper after another'[3] —going *de chute en chute.* He has now lost virtually all of his apologists in the English press—even *The Times,* which was very deeply involved with him, is trying to extricate itself.[4] Now that he's become a protectionist, the English, of course, are all the more reluctant to have anything further to do with him. Even in Germany, come to that, a reversion to the protectionist system would be downright reactionary. Still, it's excellent that Monsieur Bismarck should again be drifting towards dissolution.[5] Only let him drive the German philistines really wild and even they will lose patience in the end, particularly if their pockets are affected.

And as for the MUDDLE Bismarck is making in the field of foreign policy, that is altogether beyond compare.

Most's little paper[6] seems to be making good progress—he turns up from time to time, but not often, and we cannot, of course, accept any responsibility at all for its contents. But we wish it success, of course, as we do anything that is moving in the right direction, however imperfect its methods may be.

Your

F.