---
id: MECW45-177
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 23, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 July 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN RAMSGATE

[London,] 23 July 1877

Dear Fred,

The enclosed *Journal des Débats* is already a bit out of date but is not without interest, notably the LEADER on the oriental war and the articles from Russia. Also, *Volksfreund,*[1] which seems to have become Mr Dühring's monitor. Collet's 'ENGLAND, ENEMY OF TURKEY', etc.

I had intended to pay you a two- or three-day visit in Ramsgate; a trip to see Gumpert would be pointless for I know BY HEART, both from him and from the Karlsbad doctors and professors, everything that medical science *cannot* do in this particular case. Besides, my *insomnie* is somewhat better. But *un homme propose et l'autre dispose.*[2] The other, in this instance, being Hirsch who has come to London for the express purpose of spending a week in my company. More about him and what he has told me in the course of this epistle. But *tout d'abord,*[3] my plans for the immediate future.

I intend to leave shortly, if possible on 12th August, for *Neuenahr*[4] and *not for Karlsbad,* and this for the following reasons:

*First, because of the expense:* As you know, my wife suffers from serious digestive disturbances and, since I shall in any case be taking Tussy who has had another nasty attack, my wife would take great exception to being left behind. For the three of us plus luggage—if, for the sake of the cure one travels at one's leisure as I have several times done—the journey there and back would alone amount to £70. Moreover I long ago promised Lenchen,[5] who is very much run down, to convey her to her home where she cannot live completely gratis. Moreover, the family has all sorts of purchases to make for the trip.

*Secondly:* In unguarded moments, the Karlsbad doctors have themselves told me that, if one didn't want to visit Karlsbad every year, Neuenahr might be beneficial as an *intermezzo.* Of course, they would rather one always went to Karlsbad. But it might be better even from the viewpoint of hygiene to make a change for once and take less potent waters, for *variatio delectat corpus.*[6] Besides, my trouble is not so much my LIVER as the nervous upset occasioned by it. Hence, less potent waters, but of *essentiellement* the same composition.

Furthermore, there is one important matter I have always neglected because of the expense—the after-cure. In view of the greatly reduced travelling expenses and the fact that the house will be shut up (under Withers' care) for the duration of the cure, all these birds would be killed with one stone by exchanging Karlsbad for Neuenahr.

HENCE q.e.d. I hope you approve. Now for other matters—first of all Hirsch. He has turned out very well and has not been wasting his time. I tried him out, amongst other things, on the subject of French statistics and found him to be *à la hauteur*[7] He also gave me some very interesting information about the *almost universal* transformation of French industrial concerns into JOINT STOCK COMPANIES. In the first place, this was facilitated by legislation in the days of the Empire. In the second, the French are not partial to business, preferring whenever possible to live as rentiers. And to which end this form of business is, of course, A GODSEND.

According to Hirsch (and here he may be taking too rosy a view) the officers of the French Army, with the exception of those at the top, are republican. However that may be, it is a FACT and a typical one, that Galliffet (the incident with *la* Beaumont)[8] really did take place, as Hirsch ascertained, according to further *recherches*[9] offered his services to Mr Gambetta in a letter written in his own hand, and that the self-same Galliffet, after the *préfet* of his garrison town had been dismissed by Broglie, called on the disgraced *préfet,* together with his general staff, to proffer his condolences. If these things occur in a dry tree, etc.[10] On the other hand, there is a widespread belief among the non-commissioned officers, largely consisting of new men, that Mac-Mahon got rid of the Chamber because it had put forward a series of proposals intended to improve the lot of non-commissioned officers.

Everything that happens at the Elysée[11] daily becomes common knowledge in Paris, for the Bonapartist *tapageurs*[12] who frequent the place cannot hold their tongues. Mac-Mahon is exceedingly embittered. The brute, whose first historic words were: *J'y suis, j'y reste,*[13] his second being: *C'est assez,*[14] is now uttering his last one. All he says from morn till night is: **Merde!***[15] *

Hirsch is furious with the *Vorwärts* over the Dühring business as well as 'Nieder mit der Republik!'.[16] He wrote an exceedingly brusque letter to the executive (Geib, etc.)[17] about both these. He, too, now realises that fusion has degraded the party, both in theory and in practice.

With reference to 'Nieder mit der Republik!', he remarked that the great Hasenclever as a Prussian soldier (probably a reservist or militia man) was at the gates of Paris at the time of the Commune, and hence has no reason to lay down the law in matters of principle.

He maintains that, at the time of the Prussian conflict,[18] Hasenclever was editor of a progressist[19] paper in Krefeld,[20] sold it to an ultra-reactionary, and gravely compromised himself in the course of a lawsuit arising out of the sale. This, as Bracke himself told him, was known to Bracke and Co. when they appointed Hasenclever co-editor with Liebknecht of the *Vorwärts.*[21]

Liebknecht, MEANWHILE, *est puni par où il a péché.*[22] The Lassallean gang is doing everything it can to harass and humiliate him. For instance, they reproach him with the pittance he is paid by the *Vorwärts,* say his wife (with five children) doesn't need a maid, etc. They have, contrary to all party and journalistic practice, deliberately so organised things that Liebknecht has to go to jug for all articles,[23] even if written during his absence, thus in fact playing the same role on the *Vorwärts* as the man of straw on a French paper.

Next month Hirsch is leaving Paris for Berlin where he is going to take over the editorship of the lithographed party papers for a month[24] and proposes to do so in such a way as to mortify the allied riffraff.

I enclose herewith a letter from the *Zukunft,* in case you have not also received one.[25] Send it back to me for answering.

What a nice piece of cunning on the part of 'citizen', 'thinker' and 'socialist of the future' Most. So a second fusion is planned; ourselves, combined with Mr Dühring, for he'll be there without fail; at the same time, our names under the editorship of Most and Co. will mean our swallowing all their infamies in public, and most gratefully at that! In which case I would infinitely sooner have obliged Wiede.[26] But I am obliged to Most for having given me the opportunity of tendering my refusal. These fellows imagine they are dealing with 'babes and sucklings'. *Quelle impudence!*[27]

I should say that the Russians have grossly miscalculated with their sabre-rattling; and when unsoldierly *coups de tête*[28] of this kind don't come off HERE AND THEN, their effect on their own army and the public is highly and miserably compromising, particularly so soon after the EXIT from Armenia.

Friend Lopatin, it seems, has in the meantime again waxed unpatriotic.

I trust that your wife is feeling better. *Salut* to all.

Your

Moor