---
id: MECW45-145
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 3, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "3 March 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN BRIGHTON

[London,] 3 March 1877

DEAR FRED,

I am sending you the things from Leipzig I found at your house,[1] together with the *Plebe.* As to the important declaration by the federation of *Italia alta*[2] in which they state that they have always abided by the 'original Rules' of the International, and officially disassociate themselves from any actual federative link with the Italian Bakuninist groups,[3] you must see that the

*Vorwärts* gets this as soon as possible, along with the other very interesting, and to me highly welcome, facts contained in the first letter[4] you sent me.[5] Otherwise Liebknecht will contrive to make nonsense of this affair too.

I've been very unwell of late, with a chronic cold, catarrh and cough.

ALL RIGHT about Lina.[6]

Lavrov, who is going through a damned bad period, has praised your anti-Dühring articles, though one (i.e., he) 'is unaccustomed to such gentleness in Engels' polemics'.

You will be getting a longer missive.[7] from me some time next Monday[8] Do *not* regard this as a Dühringian manoeuvre of always making promises one never sticks to—namely doing something.

Kindest regards to Lizzy.

Your

K. Marx

Devil take Hirsch and his Castelnau. The latter has now asked me on behalf of them both to figure as a contributor to a working men's paper which they already have in hand. As if I had the time for that—and Hirsch must surely know that I haven't any! The mere fact of my name appearing, however, would make me needlessly 'responsible'. Because Mr Castelnau himself now admits that, so long as Quest is in charge, his *abrégé*[9] will belong to the Land of Nod, it seems he is going to thrash me in some other way. I have yet to see either him or Hirsch lift so much as a finger on behalf of *Capital,* unlike Laveleye or Block.[10]