---
id: MECW45-134
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Bracke, January 21, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 January 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published abridged in: P. Kampffmeyer und Altmann, *Vor dem Sozialistengesetz,* Berlin, 1928 and in full in: K. Marx-F. Engels, *Briefe an A. Bebel, W. Liebknecht, K. Kautsky und andere,* Teil 1"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE[1]

IN BRUNSWICK

[London,] 21 January 1877

Dear Bracke,

Congratulations on the most recent mustering of Social-Democratic forces in Germany.[2] It has greatly impressed other countries, in particular England, where for years Berlin newspaper correspondents have done all they can to bemuse their British readers concerning the state of our party. But 'MURDER WILL OUT', as John Bull says whenever he goes bankrupt.

Well, now I'd like to know at long last (didn't want to pester you about it during the election campaign) just where I am with Miss Isolde.;[3] She had sent me the first sample sheet of translation[4] I had replied telling her she was fitted for the work provided she took her time and didn't go at it at full-tilt, and also sending her the four additional sheets.[5] At the same time, however, I also let her have a pretty lengthy catalogue of sins relating to the sample sheet.[6]

This would seem to have been something of a shock to the little lady's nerves, for her reply betrayed a certain petulance. Undeterred by this, I wrote again to the effect that I looked upon her as the translator of my choice.[7] Since that time weeks have gone by without sight or sound of her. It is now absolutely essential that the young lady should decide, *oui ou non,*[8] and, if the first, that she should actually let me have some work. Perhaps you would be so good as to write and tell her this. Should she have defected, we shall have to try the Scheus,[9] although I'd be reluctant (not that it's in any way relevant) to have anything to do with the Scheus. There's no more time to be lost. Should the gracious Isolde decline, she would also have to return me the French sheets she has received.

Would you be so kind as to draw up a contract in duplicate—in accordance with the conditions we have agreed—of which one, with your signature, will be retained by Lissagaray and the other, with his signature, will be returned to you.

*Salut.*

Yours

K. Marx