---
id: MECW45-117
title: "Letter to Ludwig Kugelmann, October 20, 1876"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "20 October 1876"
year: 1876
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives*, Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1939 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

London, 20 October 1876

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W. Dear Kugelmann,

You may give Mr Caro the most positive assurances that, aside from announcements of family events in the more distant past and personal statements signed with his name on the Vogt affair, etc., Marx has never written *one line* for the Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung,*[1] and, if the gentlemen in Breslau[2] know better, we can only treat it as a joke. We don't even know Mr Caro by name, though his friendship with Gorchakov leads us to suppose that he knows relatively little of Russia, for Gorchakov would not be on such a footing with people who were *too well* versed in this subject. So let us hope that the order which is still lacking will shortly pop into the buttonhole that is pining for it.

Just now I'm writing a work on Mr Dühring for the *Vorwärts* in Leipzig.[3] For this purpose I need the review of *Capital* which you sent to Marx in March 1868 and which, if I'm not mistaken, was published by Dühring in a periodical appearing in Hildburghausen. Marx simply can't find it. Knowing how conscientious you are in all matters, I presume you have something about it among your notes from that time—the *name,* perhaps, of the periodical and the No. of the volume in which the thing appeared. If you could let me know this, I would order the volume and have it here within a few days. But if you can't, you should, *under no circumstances,* write to Dühring about it, for the slightest—even if indirect—contact with the man and, still more, the very slightest service rendered by him would impair my freedom of criticism in a matter in which I should preserve it to the utmost.

Work on the second volume[4] will be started again in a few days. If, by the way, one wishes to correct *all* the inanities about Marx that circulate in learned circles, one would have one's work cut out. Yesterday, for example, a Russian told us about a Russian professor who stubbornly maintained that Marx was now engaged solely in Russian studies and was doing so because firmly convinced *que la commune russe ferait le tour du monde*[5]

The war in the Orient will doubtless really get going soon.[6]

Never before have the Russians been able to strike under such favourable diplomatic circumstances as now. Militarily speaking, on the other hand, circumstances are less favourable to Russia than in 1828, and financially very unfavourable, since no one will lend her anything. Just now I'm re-reading Moltke's history of the war of 1828-29;[7] a very good book although the man could not be frank about political matters.

Thank you for the Schäffle article.

Your

F. Engels