---
id: MECW45-162
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Bracke, April 21, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 April 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE[1]

IN BRUNSWICK

[London,] *21 April* 1877

Dear Bracke,

On the sheet enclosed herewith I have again noted down for your benefit the most glaring of Kurz's mistakes.[2]

Months ago, when I ceased to correspond with her, I told Miss Kurz that, being so short of time, I could at most only undertake to correct errors of fact such as might be made by any foreigner insufficiently *au fait* with French conditions—but not mere mistakes in translation.

Hence, if she does not proceed more carefully (I shall spare enough time for one or two more proof-sheets), you will have to find an expert corrector and deduct what you pay him from the translator's fee.

You should devise one footnote in which you say once and for all that *all notes,* unless expressly stated otherwise, are Lissagaray's own. By so doing you would save the cost of having to put **A. d. V.**[3] several times on every page.

Your idea of disseminating a portrait of me taken from the caricature provided by Lachâtre[4] does not appeal to me in the least.

It is to be feared that Prussia has concluded a secret treaty with Russia; without such a treaty Russia could not invade Romania.[5]

The workers' press concerns itself too little with the oriental question, forgetting that the government's politics gamble wantonly with the lives and money of the people.

At all events, public opinion amongst the workers, petty bourgeoisie, etc., should be duly alerted long enough in advance to make things difficult for the Prussian government (in its plans e.g. to get Russia to cede a little bit of Poland or to indemnify itself at Austria's expense), should it attempt to involve Germany in the war *on Russia's behalf* or so much as put pressure on Austria to that end.

With kindest regards,

Yours,

K. M.

*ad p. 17, Mandat tacite,* the gracious lady translates this as '*silent* mandate', which is nonsense; the term 'unspoken' agreements is used in German, to be sure, but never silent ones. But in the same sentence **démarche de Ferrières',* meaning Jules Favre's journey to Ferneres, where Bismarck was, is translated as ****Ferrière's* demarche', thus changing Ferrières the *place* into a *person!*

*ad p. 18,* she has omitted the place-name from battle 'of Chevilly'.

*ibid. 'Trochu*... *lui fit une belle Conférence'.* This she translates 'read *him* a fine lecture', a literal schoolroom rendering which, however, makes no sense in the German.

*ad p. 20, l'Hôtel de Ville* she translates as 'town house'; what is meant is the September government which was housed in the 'Hôtel de Ville'.

*ibid, à ce lancé,* another rendering that smacks strongly of the schoolroom: 'at *this throw* there came a roar from the whole rabble'. What on earth does the German mean—at this throw (which?) there came a roar, etc.? *Lancé* should here be translated as 'virulent cry'.

*ibid. 'D'autres tocsins éclatent** is translated 'new' (why not old?) **tocsins* were *pulled* (!)'—What is meant is that more distress was being ventilated. The very word **éclatent',**[6] not to mention the[7] whole context, should have shown her what nonsense she was writing.

*p. 25* Miss Kurz changed what the text calls the **Cordeliers***[8] * of the old French Revolution into the latter's non-existent 'Franciscans'. Not content with that she changes **le prolétariat de la petite bourgeoisie**—the proletariat of the petty bourgeoisie—into 'the proletariat, the petty bourgeoisie'. Sheer carelessness, this!

*ad p. 26, contre-maîtres* she translates as '*senior boatswains',* whereas here it means *foremen,* while *chefs d'ateliers* are captains of industry.

*ad. p. 30, 'Paris capitulait avant le 15 sans l'irritation des patriotes'.* Kurz translates this as 'Paris capitulated before the 15th, without exacerbation on the patriots' part', which would be correct if the original read:

'*Paris capitulait etc. sans irritation de la part des patriotes** (instead of what it actually says: **sans l'irritation des patriotes').*

Hence, what is meant is precisely the opposite, namely: 'Had it not been for the exacerbation of the patriots, Paris would have capitulated before the 15th.'

What is patently at fault here—the sentence is a very simple one—is once again the most unpardonable carelessness.

*ad. p. 32, 'Jules Favre demandait à Trochu sa démission'.* Kurz translates this as: 'Jules Favre demanded *his dismissal* of Trochu.' Since a man does not *dismiss* himself from office, but is dismissed by his superiors, this sentence could only mean that Jules Favre wished to be dismissed from office by Trochu. In fact, however, Jules Favre demanded his (Trochu's) *resignation* of Trochu which is, indeed, the literal rendering of '*démission'.*