---
id: MECW45-157
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Bracke, April 11, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "11 April 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1939 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM BRACKE

IN BRUNSWICK

[London,] 11 April 1877

Dear Bracke,

Your title's a good one, except that, instead of 'text' you should put 'original text' or else just 'original', whichever you please.[1]

I am returning the first proof-sheet with this note; it will do, because the little madam,[2] despite her evident annoyance with myself, has stuck pretty accurately to my corrections. But every now and again she makes mistakes which are a bit too much of a good thing. On p. 14 we read: 'As luck would have it, a vague piece of news burst open the doors.' How can a 'piece of news', and a 'vague' one at that, burst open doors? In French it's *une vague nouvelle*, which should read: 'a fresh wave' (of people) that is!

Moreover, the translation has gone damned slowly up till now. Could you send me an approximate list of works which have appeared in Germany during recent years on the commercial and industrial crisis there?[3]

What your complaint chiefly calls for is a 'good' doctor. But whatever you do, don't treat the thing too lightly. Easy to cure in the early stages, the illness will become malignant if not dealt with in good time.

Engels is very dissatisfied with the way in which the *Vorwärts* is printing his anti-Dühring piece.[4] First they forced him into doing it, and now they pay not the slightest heed to the terms of the contract. At election time,[5] when no one did any reading, his articles were simply used to fill up space; next, they print short, disjointed fragments, one fragment one week, another a fortnight or three weeks later, which means that readers (working men in particular) lose the thread. Engels wrote, admonishing Liebknecht.[6] He believes that this way of going about things is deliberate, that there's been intimidation by Mr Dühring's handful of supporters. It would be quite natural if the same blockheads who originally made such a song and dance about the 'deathly silencing of the hollow fool' should now wish to silence his critics. It's all very well for Mr Most to talk about the undue length of the articles. His apology for Dühring,[7] luckily for him never published, was very long indeed, and if Mr Most has failed to note that there's much to be learnt from Engels' positive exposés, not only by ordinary workers and even ex-workers like himself, who suppose themselves capable of getting to know everything and pronounce on everything within the shortest possible time, but even by scientifically educated people, then I can only pity him for his lack of judgment.

With kind regards,

Yours,

K. M.

*PS.* Mile Kurz translates *l'expropriation de toutes les denrées de première nécessité*, which means expropriation by the government, or public appropriation, as 'public alienation', which gives completely the wrong sense (p. 16).

*Rationnement* = being placed on short rations (as in a besieged fortress or on board a vessel when supplies are running out), as 'maintenance of all citizens' (p. 16). She sets down the first word that comes into her head, whether it makes sense or not.

Ditto, p. 16, she translates *pour faire lever les provinces*, as 'to *levy* the province'; should read 'to cause the provinces' (not 'province') *to rise*.