---
id: MECW45-127
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 11, 1876"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "11 December 1876"
year: 1876
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN LONDON

[London,] 11 December 1876

DEAR FRED,

Kovalevsky came to see me yesterday, asked for the Hanssen;[2] told him he should have it *tomorrow evening;* at the same time agreed that he and I should call on you that same evening (Tuesday).

I am sending you the Hanssen which, as I did, you will polish off with ease in a couple of hours.

Written about book-binding.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

After the *conference* (St. James)[3] Mr Gladstone entered the gallery where Madame Novikov was sitting, offered her his arm—*pour montrer[4] * (or so he said according to Novikov's account) *que l'alliance entre l'Angleterre et la Russie existe déjà*[5] —and, with her on his arm, strutted through the vast throng which made way on both sides; he a relatively small, skinny chap, she a veritable dragoon. She remarked to Kovalevsky: *que ces Anglais sont gauches!*[6]

Generalissimus Chernyayev had twice asked Novikov by telegraph whether he should also appear at the conference; she had to tell him that Mr Gladstone would be pleased to see him personally but thought a public appearance inexpedient.

At the conference (admission by TICKET) Harrison (who, in his article 'Cross and Crescent' in the *Fortnightly,*[7] makes great play with a few HINTS recently picked up from Kovalevsky) told Howell to his face that all the workers present without exception belonged to a paid band well known to him (Harrison).

Unfortunately Charles Darwin also lent his name to the rotten demonstration; Lewes refused to do so.