---
id: MECW45-224
title: "Letter to Pyotr Lavrov, August 10, 1878"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 August 1878"
year: 1878
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Letopisi marksizma,* Book V, Moscow-Leningrad, 1930 Printed according to the original Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN PARIS

London, 10 August 1878

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear Mr Lavrov,

I hope you have received the copy of my anti-Diihring[1] which I sent off to you yesterday. I should have sent it earlier had I known your present address. I wrote to Smirnov,[2] 4 Lower Charles St., and then to Lopatin,[3] 6 rue Linné, to ask for it, but neither has replied. Could you let me know where I should send Lopatin's copy? We find his silence somewhat disturbing, for an earlier letter,[4] sent to him at the same address, was forwarded to him to Switzerland where, or so he wrote and told me, he intended to stay only until the month of June; and since then *Nachalo*[5] reports his having been *arrested in Russia.*[6] Although the news is not without chronological snags, his silence makes us anxious.

As you will have seen, the German Darwinians have, in response to Virchow's appeal,[7] come out unequivocally against socialism.

Haeckel, whose pamphlet I have just received, limits himself to speaking in general terms about the 'crazy doctrines of socialism',[8]

but Mr Oscar Schmidt of Strasbourg is going to flatten us *con amore*[9] at the natural scientists' conference[10] in Kassel.[11] It's a waste of effort. If reaction in Germany gets the bit between its teeth, its first victims, after the socialists, will be the Darwinians. Anyway, whatever happens to them, I shall take it upon myself to reply to these gentlemen.[12] And in any case, we have every reason to be satisfied with that event as, indeed, with events in general. Mr Bismarck who, for 7 years, has been working for us as if he was in our pay, now appears incapable of moderating his offers to speed up the advent of socialism. *Après moi le déluge*[13] does not suffice him; he insists upon having that deluge in his own lifetime—let his will be done. I am only afraid that he will do his work too well and that the deluge will arrive before its appointed time.

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels