---
id: MECW45-210
title: "Letter to Thomas Allsop, February 4, 1878"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "4 February 1878"
year: 1878
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in the catalogue *Sotheby Parke Bernet and C°,* London, 1966 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

MARX TO THOMAS ALLSOP

IN LONDON

[Extract]

[London,] 4 February 1878

You are mistaken, if you believe that Disraeli is in my opinion a great man. He was always a self-seeker, and such people, whatever their natural gifts, are always deficient. But, *dans le royaume des aveugles les borgnes,* etc.![1]

You are still more mistaken, if you consider *Lord Commonplace*[2]

as a small man or an adversary easily to be borne down! He is, on the contrary, the mightiest man in the British Empire. On the one hand, the *oldest nobility* man, on the other the *intellectual* incarnation of the great middle-class. *Business is business*—this is the only serious part of your bourgeois: everything else is

*show*—and must, consequently, be got rid of by *mild talk,* conventional utterances, inane twaddle. What a power, therefore, the Lord of Commonplace! If an Earl of Derby did not exist, the decaying nobility and the upstart brokers ought to have invented him...[3]

Turkey and Austria were the last props of the *old State System of Europe...* It will go now altogether to the wall, expiring in a succession of wars, which will precipitate the *Social Crisis* and engulf all the so-called *Powers,* those sham-powers, victors and vanquished—to make room for a European Social Revolution.

One way or another our enemies are digging their own graves!