---
id: MECW45-078
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, April 4, 1876"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "4 April 1876"
year: 1876
publication: "An extract from this letter was published in English for the first time in: Karl Marx, *On America and the Civil War.* Edited and translated by Saul K. Padover, New York, 1972. First published in full"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

*London,* 4 April 1876
*41 Maitland Park Road,* N. W.

(PAY ATTENTION TO THE ADDRESS; IT IS 4 1 NOW

INSTEAD OF 1, BUT SAME STREET)

My dear Friend,

It gave me great pleasure to see your handwriting again at last. My interpretation of your silence was correct, that is to say it tallied with your own explanation. I assure that we over here have also experienced more than enough mudslinging, though it was not done in so brazenly public a manner (and even that wasn't lacking in the early days after the Hague Congress)[1]. But here one might say with Chernyshevsky: 'He who treads the path of history must not be afraid of getting besmirched'.[2]

I sent you the last fifteen *livraisons[3] du Capital[4] * at the beginning of January, namely on *Monday 3 January* (I made a note of every copy I sent off at that time, which is why I know the date). However, I'm not surprised that you haven't had them, for no less than three copies consigned to Paris from here did *not* arrive, and fresh ones had to be sent off. At the beginning of January there is such a HURLY-BURLY in the post office over here that to send anything by post is irresponsible. I shall send you a further fifteen numbers this week. I only regret that you didn't get consignment No. 1, since it is precisely this part, in particular the section on the accumulation process, that I have substantially revised and hence would like you to have read.

Engels and I cannot come to Philadelphia[5] because we have too much work on our hands—I, especially, have even less time to spare inasmuch as my state of health still compels me to lose about 2 months taking the cure at Karlsbad.

We intend to apply ourselves to the *Communist Manifesto;* but the time is not yet ripe for a decision on the appendix.[6]

And now I have various requests to make of you:

1. Might I have my *Tribune* articles (ex, I think, Weydemeyer's effects) which had been kept by our friend Meyer[7] before his untimely death. I have got none of them.

2. Could the American *book catalogues* from 1873 up till the present be sent to me from New York *(needless to say at my own expense)?* The point is I want to see for myself (for the second volume of *Capital)* what has appeared that might, perhaps, be of use as regards American agriculture and relations of landownership, ditto as regards credit (panic, money, etc., and anything connected therewith).[8]

3. There is absolutely nothing to be gleaned from the English newspapers about the present scandalous goings-on in the United States. Have you by chance kept any American PAPERS that refer to them?

With warmest regards from all the family.

*Totus tuus,*

Karl Marx