---
id: MECW45-176
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 19, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "19 July 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

Ramsgate, 19 July 1877

2 Adelaide Gardens

Dear Moor,

I too shall write to Wiede[2] saying that, owing to lack of time, I can make no promises, let alone keep them. Unfortunately one cannot give the true, or rather intrinsic, reasons which you so rightly adduce. Besides—what do we know about Mr Wiede's ability to run a scientific review? Or even—on crucial occasions, of which surely there will shortly be more—about his reliability or merely his good will?

Herewith the latest from Wilhelm.[3] As regards the manuscript,[4] all I told him in my reply was that I would send the letter to you.[5]

While in the *cachot*[6] he actually polished off three complete articles which appear in Nos. 80 and 81 of the *Vorwärts*[7] Pitiable prevarication, a splendid example of how he would paraphrase your *Critique of the Programme*, turning it into a glorification of the same. I rebuffed his request for an article on the war, saying I had no wish to compete for space in the *Vorwärts* with the worthy socialists of the future, or to give further cause for clamorous protests that I fill the paper with abstruse stuff of no interest to the bulk of the readers, who evidently prefer fantasy to fact.[8]

It's only a pity that our people in Germany have such lamentable opponents. If there were, on the bourgeois side, just one competent man with a knowledge of economics, he would soon put these gentlemen in their places and open their eyes to their own confusion. But what can be the upshot of a battle in which the only weapons on either side are commonplaces and philistian drivel! As a counterpart in Germany to the learned bourgeois noddle, a new German vulgar socialism is evolving that is a worthy successor to the old 'true socialism' of 1845.[9]

The Turks will have to hurry if the affair is to turn out satisfactorily. Should they allow the Russians in Bulgaria and on the southern slopes of the Balkans to establish a quadrilateral of *Russian* fortresses,[10] the situation might become chronic there, and in that case a thrust towards Constantinople would not be impossible, i.e. one having an eye to the purely *moral* effect as in 1828—or to treachery. And treachery would seem to be quite on the cards. That treachery there was at Nikopol—otherwise of no great importance *after* the Russian crossing—seems clear to me. Never before have 6,000 Turks, with a ditch and wall in front of them, surrendered without assault—except at Varna in 1828.[11] I get quite nervous, what with the newspapers arriving twice a day and bringing news of the Russians' activity and the unfailing inaction of the Turks; it was no worse than this even in 1828 when there was *no* Turkish army at all.

You really ought to go and see Gumpert and get him to give you something for your insomnia; he's still there and the trip will do you good. Don't let the thing go too far this time—I imagine you will be going to Karlsbad again in the middle of August, and until then you have a month which you would surely do better to spend in decent health. Things aren't going too well here either.[12] Since yesterday, for no apparent reason, Lizzie has been extremely unwell; the magic powers of sea-bathing have failed her for the first time and I'm beginning to get seriously alarmed.

Kindest regards to your wife, Tussy and Lenchen as well as the Longuets and Lafargues and yourself from us all.

Your

F. E.