---
id: MECW45-248
title: "Letter to Johann Philipp Becker, January 30, 1879"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "30 January 1879"
year: 1879
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, *Vergessene Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker),* Berlin, 1920 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 30 January 1879

Dear Old Man,

It hardly needed a postcard from you for me to bestir myself on your behalf.[1] From a friend in Manchester[2] I have received one pound to be used for victims of the Anti-Socialist Law.[3] I could not put it to better use than by passing it on to you, and I have

also added a second, for which you should get a remittance of 50 frs 40 from Basle and get it, probably, the day after you receive this letter. I have retained the receipt. Anything more that can be done later on, will be done.

As to agencies, there's nothing doing.[4] Business here is absolutely rotten, and no one wants to take any chances.

So far as the *Précurseur* is concerned, I would, if I were you, tell the people in Geneva once and for all that I was not in a position *to pay out anything whatever* in respect of the paper. It is a crying shame. Not only do you take upon yourself all the worry and the work, getting nothing in return, but on top of that you are expected to cough up the expenses. But the Genevans have always been like that. Ever since Calvin and his predestination,[5] they have regarded themselves as the chosen people and expected everything to fall into their laps. It was thus in the case of the *Egalité,* when Utin had to supply both the work and the cash. It was thus in the case of the great building workers' strike, when the International had to provide the cash,[6] but knocked in vain at the Genevans' doors when there were strikes elsewhere.

We were much tickled by the news that, like Achilles, the great Guillaume has withdrawn sulking into his tent.[7] This was bound to happen. The anarchists weren't worthy of the name until anarchy broke out in their own midst. Still, Guillaume was at least the great Bakunin's successor—but that an upstart like Brousse should propose to turn the world upside down—why, it's positively ludicrous.

Over here Most is publishing a little sheet, the *Freiheit,* for the communist Workers' Society;[8] so far it has sold well.[9] We wish it all prosperity but otherwise, of course, have nothing to do with it, nor are we in any way responsible for its contents.

In Germany, by the way, things are going rapidly downhill. A walloping for the Reichstag[10] —such is the latest and best [piece of news]. Only let it carry on like this, with more and more taxes on top, and the good Bismarck will yet be surprised by his petty bourgeois, who are going to the devil fast enough as it is. Apart from the unavoidable suffering it will bring down upon individu- als, nothing could be of greater advantage to us on the whole than what is now happening. Any harm Bismarck could do *us,* he has already done; what he is now doing affects our opponents, the petty bourgeois men of Progress,[11] and, with time, will also affect the liberal big bourgeoisie.

So let him keep it up! And aside from this, affairs in Russia are going ahead splendidly, and that's the main thing. If there's an explosion there, then William,[12] too, might as well pack his bags.

Your

F. E.