---
id: MECW45-192
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, August 25, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 August 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45 Printed according to the original"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN NEUENAHR

Ramsgate, 25 August 1877
2 Adelaide Gardens

Dear Moor,

Through Schorlemmer you will already have received news of the Longuets, Lafargues and ourselves[1] either the day before yesterday or yesterday at the latest; since then you will have heard from Jenny direct about the little chap's illness which has caused her somewhat excessive alarm; according to a letter from her today, the boy is out of danger, fortunately.

We leave here on Tuesday[2] after a seven-week stay[3] which has done me a great deal of good but fallen far short of our expectations so far as Lizzie is concerned. WEATHER PERMITTING, I shall probably have to subject her to an even more drastic change of air.[4]

I congratulate you on your liver's restoration to health. You must certainly make for the hills of the Black Forest. I asked Schorlemmer to bring you the map of Baden I used in 1849 and trust he has done so. You may find it of use; considering the scale, the high ground in particular is very well drawn.

No doubt you are at last having better weather. We have done splendidly here. When it was raining everywhere else, it was merely overcast here. Two rainy afternoons in seven weeks, and today the first really wet day—and even then with longish breaks—so one can hardly complain of that. The rain, such as it was, fell mostly at night.

The immobility of the Turks may be largely attributed to the want of a train. To enable an army, not merely to fight, but to move about freely, seems to be beyond the ability of all barbarians and semi-barbarians; their army, organised with great difficulty along something approaching modern lines (for fighting), is expected to move about with the APPLIANCES of an old barbarian army. They have introduced modern weapons, but the ammunition pertaining thereto must tag along of its own accord. They organise and concentrate brigades, divisions and army corps in accordance with the rules of modern strategy, but forget that, unlike a band of janissaries, spahis or nomads, these cannot fend for themselves. This is already evident in the case of the Russians, and even more so in that of the Turks; hence, where armies of this kind are concerned, any calculation will err that ascribes to such military formations the mobility of the Western Europeans.

The blunders now being perpetrated by the Turks are all due to the anxiety which Gurko's advance has aroused in Constantinople.[5] Instead of being ordered to link up immediately—via the passes unoccupied by the Russians—either with Osman or Mehemet Ali, Suleiman is to make an immediate stand against the Russians and provide *immediate* protection for Constantinople. Hence the useless carnage on the Shipka Pass,[6] part of a combined operation which had been agreed with the other two armies and, being as usual unsynchronised, had miscarried. None of this, however, has made any difference, and once again everything will be the same as it was before.

The COLLAPSE of the Russians' military organisation is complete. They admit to losses of 15,000 men during the fighting (in Europe); their losses from sickness must amount to twice that or more. Transport completely BROKEN DOWN. Not one road under construction anywhere. Camp police non-existent. Even without the climate, the filth and the putrefying corpses would be enough to cause mass epidemics. Six Russian army corps, now eight, are in Bulgaria and, as a result of *one* battle, have been thrown back onto the defensive—of the most passive kind. Out of 50 Russian infantry divisions, 16 are on the Danube, 9 in the Caucasus and Asia, at least 5 are moving up, 6 are guarding the Black Sea and Baltic coasts, total 36; there remain 14, of which 2 are indispensable to the Baltic provinces, hence 12 infantry divisions = at most 120,000 men or, counting cavalry and artillery, 150,000 combatants available for all eventualities! And this against the 'sick man'![7] Moreover, owing to a shortage of officers, new formations are either impracticable or worthless. In short, it's worse than during the Crimean War.[8] And the same stupidity into the bargain: impelled by rage at the defeat at Plevna they at once set colossal reinforcements in motion, although these will be able to operate for a month at most, during which time they will be useless and hard put to it to keep themselves in grub. And by the end of October at the latest it will be time to turn back—back, proud Cid[9] —to the bare larders of Wallachia, not one bridge will remain across the Danube and at the end of May 1878 they will, if all goes well, begin again exactly where they began at the end of May 1877.[10]

Best wishes to you all,

Your

F. E.

By the way, the Turks may take a few more severe beatings before the winter but that's of no consequence provided Constantinople doesn't let this intimidate it.