---
id: MECW45-148
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 6, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 March 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published in "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

Brighton, 6 March 1877

42 King's Road

Dear Moor,

Very many thanks for the long opus re 'critical history'.[2] It is more than I need in order to destroy the fellow utterly in this field too. In fact Lavrov is to some extent right in maintaining that the fellow has been treated too decently hitherto.[3] When I now re-read the *Kursus der Nationalökonomie*[4] and knowing the fellow and his ways as I now do, so that I no longer need fear some hidden trap amidst the verbiage and can see the pompous *fadaise*[5] for what it is, I certainly consider that a little more contempt wouldn't come amiss. The good Lavrov is entitled to his own feelings about it, of course, and in his проповѣди[6] can leave out of account the crescendo which the likes of us must always bear in mind when engaged on so protracted a demolition job. When I've finished the 'Philosophy', however, there'll be no further need for him to complain about gentleness, still less when it comes to the 'Political Economy'.

Collet's grave misgivings apropos Gladstone were inevitable.[7]

These are things that ought not to happen without orders from above. It would have been better to have remained silent until Gladstone was back in office and then left it to Urquhart to issue a grave warning by way of profound INNUENDOES incomprehensible even to the person concerned. The war against SECRET DIPLOMACY must itself be waged secretly and diplomatically.

I shall make a digest of the Plebeiana[8] for Wilhelm.[9] The present split in Italy spells disaster for *messieurs les* anarchist dictators. The brief comments in this number of the *Plebe* on the *spiriti ristretti ed anarchici—ed alio stesso tempo mostruosa contradizione, dittatoriali*[10] go to show that Bignami has acquired an intimate knowledge of the peculiarities of these people. All the same, Bakunin was more skilful and patient than Mr Guillaume, who is in too much of a hurry in the matter of world government.

What you sent me wasn't a new proof.[11] I've had none as yet. Wilhelm is making a thorough mess of things.

We return tomorrow week.[12] Lizzy is noticeably restored, appetite *almost* normal; but here, on this long uninterrupted stretch of beach, the air is really incomparable.

Best wishes,

Your

F. E.