---
id: MECW45-139
title: "Letter to Hermann Ramm, January 25, 1877"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 January 1877"
year: 1877
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1929 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 45"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN RAMM

IN LEIPZIG

London, 25 January 1877

Dear Ramm,

Since I do not know whether Liebknecht is back from Offenbach,[1] I am writing to you.

[2][3]

To begin with, it is nearly a fortnight now since I had any of the *Dühring* proof-sheets[4] (the last, sent back at once, being Art.VI) and I'm afraid that a consignment may have gone astray.

Next, I had requested Liebknecht;[5] to send me the Nos. of the *Neue Welt* containing my biography of Wolff[6] I received the first 4 numbers, but since then it was only from the mutilated *Neue Welts* used for packing the *Vorwärts* that I saw that the subsequent part had also appeared. Needless to say, I neither kept a copy of the manuscript here, nor did anything about getting hold of the thing, having taken Liebknecht at his word; would you be so good as to see to this before all numbers have been torn to pieces and used up?

As to the by-elections, we over here are very much in the dark. All we know is that Rittinghausen is 'in', as the English say.[7] A pity that the Christian-Social chaplain, Laaf, was licked; in the first place, it would have been amusing to watch him steering a middle course through the Reichstag and, in the second, since he was evidently doomed to make an ass of himself, he would have stirred up dissension among the working men at Aachen, thus giving us a chance of introducing the thin end of the wedge.

What is most encouraging about the recent elections is the great progress made in the country, particularly in the big farming districts of Schleswig-Holstein and Mecklenburg. Thence it's an easy step to Pomerania and Brandenburg and, once inroads have been made into the schnapps country,[8] it will soon be all up with the Prussian monarchy.

Ever your friend,

F. Engels