---
id: MECW45-057
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 8, 1875"
volume: 45
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 September 1875"
year: 1875
publication: "First published in English in *The Letters of Karl Marx,* selected and translated with explanatory notes and an introduction by Saul K. Padover, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1979"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN RAMSGATE

Karlsbad, 8 September 1875 Germania

Dear FRED,

You will doubtless have already heard from Tussy that my first letter to her, which I handed in personally at the main post office here on 18 August in the presence of Dr Gans junior, has been intercepted, doubtless by the Prussian postal authorities. The subsequent ones have arrived; the latest, which I sent her last week, appears to have shared the fate of the first, for I should otherwise surely have had an answer from her.[1]

This time I'm really getting on splendidly with the cure; with rare exceptions good nights, too. But I am also, or so my

numerous doctor friends say, Karlsbad's model guest. From time to time these gentlemen have been at pains to lead me away from the path of 'salvation'[2] on the pretext *praesente medico*,[3] etc., but their attempts have failed.

As a second-year patient I have been promoted in the hierarchy of the springs. Last year my sources of supply were Theresien- brunn (41° R), Marktbrunn (39°) and Mühlbrunn (43.6°), while I only took a glass of Sprudel twice. This year, from the second week on, they have been Felsenquelle (one glass a day) (45° R), Bernardsbrunn (53.8°) (two glasses) and Sprudel (two glasses) 59°-60° R, making five glasses of hot every morning, on top of which come one cold Schlossbrunn on rising and one at bedtime.

According to Prof. Ferdinand Ragsky's analysis, Sprudel water consists of:

In 16 ounces=7680 g.

Sulphate of potash

1.2564

Sulphate of soda

18.2160

Chloride of sodium

7.9156

Carbonate of soda

10.4593

Carbonate of lime

2.2870

Carbonate of magnesia

0.9523

Carbonate of strontium

0.0061

Carbonate of ferric oxide

0.0215

Carbonate of manganic oxide

0.0046

Phosphate of clay

0.0030

Phosphate of lime

0.0015

Fluoride of potassium

0.0276

Silica

0.5590

Total of fixed constituents

41.7099

Free and uncombined carbonic acid

5.8670

Among the fellows calling for the celebration of Sedan Day[4]

here was a businessman from Barmen, Gustav Köttgen—might he be connected with the old fool?[5]

You had better watch out: Karl Grün is competing with you. He is bringing out a work on natural philosophy next spring and has already given a foretaste of it in the Berlin *Wage* which Weiss has sent me from Berlin.[6]

I shall be leaving here on Saturday,[7] initially for Prague, having got a letter from there today from Oppenheim.[8] From Prague I shall proceed via Frankfurt.

Dr Fleckles has just arrived and is taking me out for a meal. So my long letter has come to naught; moreover Dr Fleckles says it is unsuited to the cure. Kindest regards to Madame Lizzy.

Your

Moor