---
id: MECW06-096
title: "Minutes of the Meeting of the Paris Community of the Communist League, March 8, 1848"
volume: 6
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 March 1848"
year: 1848
publication: "First published in Marx/Engels, Gesamt-ausgäbe, I. Abteilung, Bd. 7, 1935 Printed according to the manuscript Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 6"
status: raw
---

**MINUTES OF THE COMMUNITY MEETING OF MARCH 8, 1848**

Elected Chairman: K. Schapper. Secretary: K. Marx.

Schapper: proposes to constitute ourselves the Paris Circle, no longer a single community.

Supported by Marx and others. Agreed.

Admitted: Hermann.

Discussion on the re-admission of removed community members;

Born gives a report on the meeting in the café l'Europe; so does Sterbitzki. Resolved by a large majority not to go into this café, where Decker and Venedey hold a meeting.

Engler, Buchfink and Vogler (Weitlingians) unanimously admitted.

Unanimously resolved: the three above-named League members instructed to admit members of the Weitling community whom they consider suitable.

Schilling unanimously admitted.

Admitted to the public workers' society as:

President: H. Bauer.

Vice-president: Hermann.

2 secretaries: Born and Vogel.

Treasurer. Moll.

3 organisers: Buchfink, Schapper, Home.

Agreed that the President shall use the form of address: Friends; anybody else as he likes.

Marx to submit draft Rules for the workers' society.

The public society shall be called German Workers' Club.[1]

Wilhelm Höger admitted as League member (proposed by Schapper, supported by H. Bauer).

The meeting place of the public society shall be in the centre of the city. Some members are instructed to look for suitable premises.

The League meeting is to be held at No. 6, St. Louis St. Honoré.

Sterbitzki proposes Hermann, who is admitted.