---
id: MECW06-074
title: "Page from the Rough Draft of the Manifesto of the Communist Party"
volume: 6
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "January 1848"
year: 1848
publication: "First published as a facsimile in the journal Der Wahre Jakob No. 565 (6), March 17, 1908 Printed according to the manuscript Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Vo"
status: raw
---

This is the only extant page of the rough version of the *Communist Manifesto*. The fair copy sent to London at the end of January 1848 to be printed did not survive. The page of the rough copy refers in part to the first and mainly to the second section of the *Manifesto.*

13) ...Proletarians, for the Ten-Hour Bill without sharing their illusions about the results of this measure.[1]

We have seen, moreover:

The Communists do not put forward a new theory of private property. They merely state the historical fact that the <means of production)[2] bourgeois production relations and with them bourgeois property relations <and> <eith> <certain> of the

<devel> <social> development of the social forces of production no longer <are appropriate> and therefore <to the development of industry itself) (and) in t....

But do not argue with us because you measure (oppose) the abolition of bourgeois property by your bourgeois ideas of freedom, culture, etc.! Your ideas themselves <are only> <prod> <are>

(correspond) are products of the (existing) bourgeois production and property relations, as your legal system is merely the will of your class elevated into law. (Your> A will whose content is determined by the material living conditions of your class.

(Your) You share with all ruling classes that have perished the biased idea of transforming (the) your (bourgeois) production and property relations from historical, (and merely> transitory relations corresponding only to a certain (stage in the) development of the productive forces, into eternal laws of nature and reason.

What you comprehend for feudal property, you no longer comprehend for bourgeois <conditi> property.

And yet, you cannot deny the fact that <in the course) with the development of <bourgeois> industry the one-sided, on....[3]

The Communists do not put forward any new theory of property. They state a fact. You deny the most striking facts. You have to deny them. You are backward looking Utopians.