---
id: MECW09-149
title: "Letter from the Minister of the Interior von Manteuffel to the Oberprasident of the Rhine Province, Herr Eichmann, together with a Copy of the Instructions Regarding the Expulsion of Marx Sent to the Royal Government Authorities in Cologne"
volume: 9
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 April 1849"
year: 1849
publication: "First published in the Zeitschrift für Geschichtswissenschaft, Berlin, 1969, No. 5 Printed according to the manuscript Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 9"
status: raw
---

To the Royal Oberpräsident,

His Honour Herr Eichmann,

at Coblenz

In response to the courteous communication of 29th ult. from

Your Honour regarding the expulsion of Dr. Carl Marx, I have today dispatched the instructions to the Royal Government Authorities in Cologne, a copy of which I enclosed herewith for your information.

At the same time I grant Your Honour full discretion to issue the appropriate instructions to the said Government Authorities concerning those points which you most particularly wish to see observed in case of the expulsion of the aforesaid Marx.

Berlin, April 7, 1849

The Minister of the Interior

v. Manteuffel

**Copy**

To the Royal Government Authorities at Cologne

Consequent upon the report of 10th ult.,[1] for which the supporting documents are returned enclosed, I would reply to the Royal Government Authorities that I for my part see no objection to the proposed expulsion of Dr. Carl Marx, who is no longer a subject of this polity. The Royal Government Authorities however need no special authorisation to this end; indeed it must be left to the latter to judge whether there is sufficient cause for such a step. It would seem desirable, it is true, to proceed with the expulsion of the aforesaid Marx on the direct occasion of a specific, unequivocal offence on his part; however, such an occasion is unlikely to be wanting, since, as I am informed, he has very recently once again evoked grave suspicion of treasonable activities endangering the state.[2]

Accordingly I simply leave the decision as to further action to the discretion of the Royal Government Authorities, and look forward to receiving a fuller account of the issue of the affair in due course.

Berlin, April 7, 1849

The Minister of the Interior

signed v. Manteuffel