---
id: MECW07-048
title: "The Northern Star about the Neue Rheinische Zeitung"
volume: 7
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels
written: "26 June 1848"
year: 1848
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 7, p. 129; First published: in *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* No. 27, June 27, 1848."
status: raw
---

An article published in *The Northern Star* No. 557, June 24, 1848, under the title "The New Rhenish Gazette" stated: "*New Rheinische Zeitung* is the title of a new daily journal lately started at Cologne. This journal, which announces itself 'the organ of the democracy', is conducted with singular ability and extraordinary boldness; and we hail it as a worthy, able, and valiant comrade in the grand crusade against tyranny and injustice in every shape and form. The principal editor is Dr. *Marx* one of the ablest of the defenders of Labour's rights in Europe. The assistant editors include W. Wolff, of Breslaw, a sterling democrat: Dr. Dronke, of Coblentz, ex-state prisoner; F. Wolff, of Cologne (was ten years in Paris); H. Bürgers (of Cologne, a favourite popular orator, and member of the first Popular assembly at Frankfort); Frederick Engels, whose able writings have often graced the columns of the *Star *and George Weerth, a name honourably known to our readers as the unmasker of the Freetrade delusionists at the celebrated Brussels Conference. We wish our contemporary a long career of usefulness and victory."

The *Northern Star*, the organ of the English Chartists, which is edited by Feargus O'Connor, G. Julian *Harney* and Ernest *Jones*, contains in its latest issue an appreciation of the manner in which the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* interprets the English people's movement and advocates democracy in general.

We thank the editors of the *Northern Star* for the friendly and genuinely democratic way in which they have mentioned our newspaper. At the same time we want to assure them that the revolutionary *Northern Star* is the only English newspaper for whose appreciation we care.