---
id: MECW07-094
title: "Dr. Gottschalk"
volume: 7
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "4 August 1848"
year: 1848
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 7, p. 325; First published: in *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* No. 66, August 5, 1848"
status: raw
---

*Cologne,* August 4. Dr. Gottschalk had his three first interrogations published in the *Zeitung des Arbeiter-Vereines zu Köln*. As a punishment, the warders he has had up to now have been removed and a new gaoler appointed in the person of warder *Schröder*.

"The latter was not willing to take over his duties without an exact inventory," writes the local workers' paper, "and so Dr. Gottschalk and his cell were searched again, customs-style. Although nothing suspicious was found, a much closer watch than before is being kept on him." '

*Public* proceedings in the Rhine Province are a sheer illusion as long as they are supplemented by "*Spanish Inquisition proceedings*".[1]

In order to appreciate Gottschalk's arrest, one should read the *Gervinus Zeitung*. [Deutsche Zeitung] The forceful intervention of the Public Prosecutor, it says, has *restored confidence once more*. On the other hand, the approaching festivities [600th anniversary of the Cologne Cathedral in August 1848] are diverting the attention of the frivolous citizens of Cologne from all thought of politics. And these same citizens of Cologne, to whom the Government has handed over Gottschalk and the Cathedral festivities, these same ungrateful citizens, the *Gervinus Zeitung* exclaims, forget all these good deeds of the Prussian Government as soon as it stammers the first word about a compulsory loan!

The arrest of Gottschalk and Anneke, the press trials, and so on, have restored *confidence*. In the city, confidence is the basis of *public credit*. Therefore lend the Prussian Government money, a great deal of money, and it will lock up even more people, stage even more press trials, manufacture even more confidence. More arrests, more press trials, more reaction from the Government. But in honest exchange — mark this well — more money, more and more money from the citizens!

We advise the Prussian Government in its financial difficulties to take refuge in a measure tried and tested under Louis XIV and Louis XV. Let it sell *Lettres de cachet! Lettres de cachet! Lettres de cachet!*[2] as a means of restoring confidence and filling up the Prussian treasury!