---
id: MECW07-165
title: "Note in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung on Marx's Departure for Vienna"
volume: 7
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "25 August 1848"
year: 1848
publication: "First published in the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* No. 85, August 25, 1848 Printed according to the newspaper Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 7"
status: raw
---

Marx went to Vienna to strengthen ties with the democratic workers' organisations and to collect funds for the publication of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* in view of the refusal of many shareholders to subsidise the newspaper after it came out in defence of the Paris insurgents. Marx left Cologne on August 23, and stayed for a few days in Berlin, where he met Left-wing deputies of the Berlin National Assembly, the Russian revolutionary Mikhail Bakunin and other democrats.

Marx arrived in Vienna on August 27. The next day, at a meeting of the Democratic Association, he spoke against the representative of the Berlin Central Committee of Democrats, Julius Fröbel, who supported the proposal to petition the Emperor to dismiss Minister of Labour Schwarzer — the main culprit in the bloody clashes between the bourgeois national guard and the workers in Vienna on August 23, 1848. Marx was opposed on principle to conciliating monarchs. On August 30 Marx delivered a lecture to the first Vienna Workers' Association on the June insurrection in Paris, noting that German emigrant workers had taken part in it, and on September 2 lectured on wage labour and capital. During his talk with the leader of the German-Bohemian faction in the Austrian National Assembly (Reichstag) Borros, he was convinced that the national antagonism between Czechs and Germans did not extend to relations between the workers of the two nationalities since these were united by common class interests.

On his way back, Marx visited Dresden and again Berlin. Here he attended sessions of the Prussian National Assembly and met the Polish revolutionary Koscielski who in the name of the Polish democrats later sent him two thousand talers for the publication of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. About mid-September Marx returned to Cologne.

Cologne, August 24. The editor-in-chief of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung, Karl Marx, yesterday went to Vienna for a few days.