---
id: MECW07-056
title: "Marrast and Thiers"
volume: 7
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels
written: "2 July 1848"
year: 1848
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 7, p. 168; First published: in *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* No. 33, July 3, 1848."
status: raw
---

We have continuously drawn the attention of the readers of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* to the intrigues of the party of the *National*,[1] personified by *Marrast*. We have investigated the underhanded means by which this party strives to seize the dictatorship. At the same time we have pointed out how the dictatorship of Marrast conjures up the dictatorship of Thiers.

Several facts strikingly illustrate how much the party of the *National*, due to its victory, has already succumbed to the party of Thiers.[2] which is now closely fused with the dynastic opposition[3]

The appointment of *Carnot*, a man of the *National*, as Minister has stirred up a violent uproar in the National Assembly. *Marie's* candidature for the presidency of the National Assembly was rivalled by *Dufaure's* candidature and, as the *Débats* reports, was only approved because he was known as "the wisest and most moderate man of the old Executive Committee", i.e. because he made the most concessions to the old dynastic party and because he drafted the Bill on gatherings, the continuation of the September Laws,[4] and sponsored and defended it in the National Assembly! The fact 'remains that "Marrast" and "Thiers" threw dice for the presidency of the National Assembly.

This does not satisfy, however, the "dynastic opposition". One of the first laws that it is preparing is a law concerning the municipal councils, a law which is directly aimed against the autocracy and influence of Marrast, the Mayor of Paris. And he will fall.

In a few days the entire National Assembly will tear itself apart.

The reaction will proceed until the party of the *National* is excluded from all exercise of power. "Republic" and "dynastic opposition" will confront each other once more, but the republic will no longer win on the terms of February.

The people will no longer indulge in fancies. It will no longer "hide its revenge under a bushel" as Caussidière puts it and it will no longer "fling its wrath into the torrents of Styx". [From Caussidière's speech in the National Assembly on June 27, 1848, Neue Rheinische Zeitung, July 1, 1848] *Qui vivra verra*.