---
id: MECW07-128
title: "Revolution in Vienna (Neue Rheinische Zeitung)"
volume: 7
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "11 October 1848"
year: 1848
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 7, p. 457; First published: in *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* No. 114, October 12, 1848."
status: raw
---

In English, this article was first published in an abridged form in the magazine *Labour Monthly*, 1948, Vol. XXX, No. 10, and in full in the collections: Karl Marx, *On Revolution*, ed. by S. K. Padover, New York, 1971, Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *Articles from the "Neue Rheinische Zeitung". 1848-49*, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972, and Karl Marx, *The Revolutions of 1848. Political Writings*, Vol. 1, London, Penguin Books, 1973.

*Cologne,* October 11. In its first issue (for June 1) the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* wrote of a revolution (on May 25) in Vienna. Today, when we resume publication for the first time after the break caused by the declaration of a state of siege in Cologne, we bring news of the much more important Viennese revolution of October 6 and 7. Detailed reports on the events in Vienna compel us today to omit all analytical articles. Only a few words of comment, therefore, on the revolution in Vienna. Our readers will see from the reports of our Vienna correspondent [Müller-Tellering] that the bourgeoisie's distrust of the working class threatens, if not to wreck the revolution, at least to hamper its development. However that may be, the repercussions of this revolution in Hungary, Italy and Germany foiled the entire plan of campaign devised by the counter-revolution. The flight from Vienna of the Emperor and of the Czech deputies[1] compels the Viennese bourgeoisie to continue the fight unless it is prepared to surrender unconditionally. The Frankfurt Assembly, which is just now engaged in presenting us Germans with

a national gaol
and a common whip,
[Heinrich Heine, Der Tannhäuser]

has been rudely awakened from its day-dreaming by the events in Vienna, and the Government at Berlin is beginning to doubt the efficacy of the *state of siege* as a panacea. The state of siege, like the revolution, is making a round-the-world tour. A large-scale experiment has just been made to impose a state of siege on a whole country, Hungary. This attempt has called forth a revolution in Vienna instead of a counter-revolution in Hungary. The state of siege will not recover from this setback. Its reputation has been permanently ruined. By an irony of fate, simultaneously with Jellachich, *Cavaignac*, the hero of the state of siege in the West, has been singled out for attack by all the factions who were saved in June by his grape-shot. Only by resolutely going over to the revolution will he be able to hold out for some time.

Following the latest news from Vienna, we publish several reports sent on October 5, because they reflect the hopes and fears current in Vienna about the fate of Hungary.