---
id: MECW25-008
title: "Appendices"
volume: 25
doc_type: article
status: raw
---

The headings of the four folders and the list of contents made by Engels for the second and third folders of materials for *Dialectics of Nature* were written in his closing years, in any case not earlier than 1886, for the list of contents of the second folder includes the fragment "Omitted from *Feuerbach*," which was written early in 1886.

[First Folder]

Dialectics and Natural Science

[Second Folder]

The Investigation of Nature and Dialectics

1) Notes:

a) On the Prototypes of the Mathematical Infinite in the Real World

b) On the "Mechanical" Conception of Nature

c) On Nägeli's Incapacity to Know the Infinite 2) Old Preface to [Anti]-Dühring. On Dialectics 3) Natural Science and the Spirit World 4) The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man 5) Basic Forms of Motion 6) Omitted from *Feuerbach*

[Third Folder]

Dialectics of Nature

1) Basic Forms of Motion

2) Two Measures of Motion

3) Electricity and Magnetism

4) Natural Science and the Spirit World

5) Old Introduction

6) Tidal Friction

[Fourth Folder]

Mathematics and Natural Science
Miscellaneous

This plan was compiled after June 1878 – since it mentions the old preface to (*Anti*]*-Duhring* written in May-June 1878, and a pamphlet by Haeckel entitled, *Freie Wissenschalt und freie Lehre* (*Free Science and Free Teaching*), published in June 1878-and before 1880, since there is no mention in it of such chapters of *Dialectics of Nature* as "Basic Forms of Motion," "Heat," and "Electricity," which were written in 1880-82. A comparison of the reference to the German bourgeois Darwinists Haeckel and Schmidt contained in point 11 of this plan with Engels's letter to Lavrov dated August 10, 1878, gives grounds for assuming that the present outline was written in August 1878.

(1) Historical introduction: the metaphysical outlook has become impossible in natural science owing to the very development of the latter.

(2) Course of the theoretical development in Germany since Hegel (old preface).[1] The return to dialectics takes place unconsciously, hence contradictorily and slowly.

(3) Dialectics as the science of universal inter-connection. Main laws: transformation of quantity and quality – mutual penetration of polar opposites and transformation into each other when carried to extremes-development through contradiction or negation of the negation – spiral form of development.

(4) The inter- connection of the sciences. Mathematics, mechanics, physics, chemistry, biology. St. Simon (Comte), and Hegel.

(5) Apercus [reflections, remarks) on the separate sciences and their dialectical content:

1. Mathematics: dialectical aids and expressions. Mathematical infinite really occurring.

2. Celestial mechanics-now resolved into a process. - Mechanics: point of departure was inertia, which is only the negative expression of the indestructibility of motion.

3. Physics-transitions of molecular motions into one another. Clausius and Loschmidt.

4. Chemistry: theories, energy.

5. Biology. Darwinism. Necessity and chance.

(6) The limits of knowledge. Du-Bois-Reymond and Nägeli.[2] -Helmholtz, Kant, Hume.

(7) The mechanical theory. Haeckel.[3]

(8) The plastidule soul - Haeckel and Nägeli.[4]

(9) Science and teaching - Virchow.[5]

(10) The cell state - Virchow.

(11) Darwinian politics and theory of society - Haeckel and Schmidt.[6] - Differentiation of man through labour. - Application of economics to natural science. Helmholtz's "work" (*Populäre Vortrage*, II).[7]

This outline is fundamentally a plan for the chapter "Basic Forms of Motion." On the other hand, there is a whole group of chapters – interconnected as to subject and period – that correspond to it, namely, "Basic Forms of Motion," "The Measure of Motion. Work," "Tidal Friction," "Heat" and "Electricity." All these chapters were written between 1880 and 1882. The outline was written earlier – probably in 1880.

(1) Motion in general. of motion.

(2) Attraction and repulsion. Transference

(3) [Law of the] conservation of energy applied to this.

Repulsion + attraction. – Addition of repulsion = energy.

(4) Gravitation - heavenly bodies - terrestrial mechanics.

(5) Physics. Heat. Electricity,

(6) Chemistry.

(7) Summary.

(a) Before 4: Mathematics. Infinite line. + and - are equal.
(b) In astronomy: performance of work by the tides. Double calculation in Helmholtz, II, p. 120. "Forces" in Helmholtz, II, p. 190.