---
id: MECW23-033
title: "Letter to the Spanish Federal Council of the International Working Men's Association, March 27, 1872"
volume: 23
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "27 March 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Printed according to the rough manuscript Translated from the Spanish Published in English for the first time"
status: raw
---

We have received your letter of March 15, and we thank you for the detailed report about the present state of our Association in Spain, a very satisfying state in the circumstances at the moment.;[1] We will publish the most important elements of this report, we will send you a letter for the Saragossa Congress, and we will send you a telegram[2] later. The telegram will be in the name of the General and British Federal Councils. As for France, with the Dufaure law[3] against the International, there is no way to maintain a Federal Council, but we will write to Paris so that the "Ferré Section"[4] sends you a letter for the Congress—there will be no signatures but you will receive it signed "Ferré Section", which will be in order. In Germany the recent trials have disorganised the Association for the moment, and as you will know Liebknecht and Bebel have been condemned to two years in prison, mainly because of involvement with the International[5] sending a telegram from there would be impracticable at the moment; however we have sent your letter to Germany.

There is no problem about stamps. Ask for as many stamps as you think you will need, and send us the quotas or parts of the quotas received before the 1st July; then two or three weeks before the General Congress you can send us the rest with the stamps which you have not used. We have a large quantity and it will not matter if your delegates at the Congress return us a thousand or two.

Yesterday afternoon Jung the treasurer did not come to the Council. I have sent him the receipt to sign and when I have it back from him I shall send it with the letter for the Saragossa Congress.

We hope that you will submit the resolutions of the London Conference to the Regional Congress for their approval. These resolutions have so far been recognised by the German, Romance, German-Swiss (Zurich), English, Dutch and American federations and by the French and Irish sections.