---
id: MECW23-049
title: "Resolutions of the Sub-Committee on Mikhail Bakunin and the Alliance"
volume: 23
doc_type: article
author: "First International
Frederick Engels"
written: "5 July 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "Adopted at the sitting of the Sub-Committee on July 5, 1872  First published, in Russian, in Generalny Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1871-1872, Moscow, 1965  Printed according to the original Transla"
status: raw
---

This is the record of Engels' proposals tabled at the meeting of the Sub-Committee of the General Council on July 5, 1872. Marx and Engels were instructed to give the General Council their opinion of the Alliance's secret activity. In line with this resolution, Engels drew up the draft address to all the members of the International Association, and this was discussed at a General Council meeting in August 1872 (see this volume, pp. 205-10).

The Sub-Committee (Standing Committee) or the Executive Committee was formed out of the Committee appointed simultaneously with the foundation of the International Association to draw up its programme and the Rules. It included the General Secretary of the Association, the Treasurer and the corresponding secretaries for different countries. The Sub-Committee had a wide range of duties: it carried on the routine management of the Association and drew up documents which were later considered by the General Council.

This document was published in English for the first time in The General Council of the First International. 1871-1872. Minutes, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1968.

1. That it would not reply to Bakunin's letter.[1][2]

2. Citizen Engels was to write to Valencia, to the Federal Council, to ask it to account for its relations with the Alliance, since the Council had at least three of its members belonging to this society.[3]

3. The Sub-Committee was to request the General Council to propose the expulsion of Bakunin and the members of the Alliance at the next Congress.