---
id: MECW22-078
title: "Record of Engels' Speech on the Situation in Spain, August 22, 1871"
volume: 22
doc_type: article
author: "First International
Frederick Engels"
written: "26 August 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published in The Eastern Post,  No. 152, August 26, 1871 Reproduced from the newspaper Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 22"
status: raw
---

[FROM THE NEWSPAPER REPORT ON THE

GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF AUGUST 22, 1871]

Citizen Engels reported that the members of the Spanish Federal Council had great hopes from the change of Ministry which had just taken place in Spain. It was expected that the prosecutions against the International would cease, and then the Association would soon extend its ramifications throughout the length and breadth of the peninsula. A great change had taken place in the ranks of the Republican party. On the establishment of the Commune in Paris, the leaders of the Republican party in Spain—not knowing the social principles involved—went in for it. But as soon as they found out that it meant a struggle for more than municipal government they turned round and denounced it. This shocked the Spanish working-class, which formed the bulk of the Republican party. Having had their eyes opened, the people not wishing to be used as tools, had turned to the International. Citizen Engels also reported that Citizen Paul Lafargue, son-in-law to Dr. Marx, and formerly a member of the General Council, had been arrested in Spain and sent under an escort of gendarmes to Madrid. The government, however, finding nothing against him, had since liberated him.