---
id: MECW22-079
title: "Record of Marx's Speech in the Opening of the London Conference"
volume: 22
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "17 September 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published, in Russian, in the book  The London Conference of the First International, 1936  Printed according to the minutes submitted by Rochat, verified with his rough notes  Translated from t"
status: raw
---

Marx's speech at the opening of the London Conference has reached us in two versions.

Like the speeches of other delegates, it was recorded in French in the minutes of the Conference sessions by the two secretaries, Martin and Rochat. The English minutes are not extant.

Another version of Marx's speech was given by Eccarius in his article on the London Conference, published anonymously in The Scotsman, No. 87, October 2, 1871.

Marx said that the conference was "a meeting of delegates from different countries, rendered necessary by extraordinary circumstances, to consult with the General Council about urgent matters arising out of these extraordinary circumstances; but that this conference could not appoint a new General Council, or transfer the seat of the General Council, or alter the fundamental Rules of the Association. Its province was to decide upon tactics, policy, and organisation within the limits of the existing Rules, and to devise measures for carrying out these rules more effectually".

[FROM THE MINUTES OF THE SESSION

OF THE LONDON CONFERENCE OF THE INTERNATIONAL

WORKING MEN'S ASSOCIATION ON SEPTEMBER 17, 1871]

Marx: The General Council has called a conference to consult the delegates of the various countries about the measures to be taken to guard against the risks which the Association is running in a large number of countries, and to set up a new organisation to meet the needs of the situation.

Secondly, to draw up a response to the various governments that are working unceasingly to destroy the Association by every means at their disposal.

And finally to reach a definitive solution to the Swiss conflict. Other secondary questions will certainly be raised during the course of the conference and should be resolved.

Citizen Marx adds that it will be necessary to make a public declaration to the Russian government, which is trying to implicate the Association in a certain affair relating to a secret society whose main leaders are completely unconnected with or hostile to the Association.[1]

This conference is private, but when all the delegates have returned to their countries, the General Council will publish those resolutions which the Conference deems it necessary to publish.