---
id: MECW22-047
title: "Letter to the Editor of La Verité, August 30, 1871"
volume: 22
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "30 August 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published in Le Soir, No. 862, September 3, 1871, and in other bourgeois newspapers and also in the newspapers L'Internationale, No. 139, September 10, 1871, Der Volksstaat., No. 74, September 1"
status: raw
---

Though not published in La Vérité, this statement was widely circulated. It was published in 1871 in Le Soir, No. 862, September 3, Paris-Journal, No. 236, September 4, Journal des Débats, September 4, La Favilla, No. 210, September 8 and also in the press organs of the International; L'Internationale, No. 139, September 10, Der Volksstaat, No. 74, September 13, II Proletario Italiano, No. 19, September 14, Die Tagwacht, No. 38, September 16 and L'Eguaglianza, No. 10, September 17.

International Working Men's Association

256, High Holborn, London.—W.C.

**30 August 1871**

Mr. Editor,

Having read in today's Daily News that M. Renaut is attributing to the International a manifesto inviting the French peasants to burn all the châteaux they can, etc.,[1] Mr. John Hales, the General Secretary of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association, immediately sent this telegram to M. L. Bigot, Assi's defence counsel:

"Incendiary proclamation attributed to the International is a fabrication. We are ready to make a sworn affidavit before an English magistrate."

I now hasten to warn the French public through your respected newspaper that all the manifestos printed in Paris in the name of the International since the entry of the French government troops into Paris—that all these manifestos without a single exception are fabrications.[2]

I make this declaration to you not only on my word of honour, but I am ready to give you an affidavit[3] sworn before an English magistrate.

I have reason to believe that these vile creations do not even emanate directly from the police, but from Monsieur B...,[4] an individual attached to one of these Parisian newspapers which *The Standard* (Tory newspaper) in one of its latest issues describes as organs of the demi-monde.[5]

Yours faithfully,

***Karl Marx***