---
id: MECW22-070
title: "Record of Engels' Speeches on the Paris Commune and in Connection with the Centennial Anniversary of Robert Owen's Birth"
volume: 22
doc_type: article
author: "First International
Frederick Engels"
written: "9 May 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 22 First published, in Russian, in the book The First International during the Paris Commune, Moscow, 1941 and in the book The General Council of the First "
status: raw
---

Published in English for the first time in The General Council of the First International. 1870-1871. Minutes, Moscow, 1967, pp. 189-90, 192.

**[FROM THE MINUTES OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL MEETING OF MAY 9, 1871]**

Cit. Engels then stated that the address[1] was not ready yet. Cit. Marx had been seriously unwell and drawing up the address had made him worse. But it would be ready on Saturday and the Subcommittee[2] could meet at Marx's any time after five o'clock in the afternoon. A delegate from the Commune had been here, the reports were good. Strictness had to be employed not to let people pass without passports. It had been discovered that spies from Versailles had lounged about at their leisure. The main attack had failed. The Versailles army had tried to get in between the National Guards and the ramparts but now they could only attack in one place and that was where they had failed before. The defence was getting stronger. The Commune had lost a little ground [but] had regained Clamart. Even if the army succeeded at the ramparts there were the barricades afterwards and there had never been such a struggle before as the one impending. For the first time barricades would be defended by cannon, by military guns, and by regularly organised forces. The contending armies were nearly equal now. Versailles could get no troops from the country, they had to send some away to keep the towns in order. Thiers could not even allow the Town Councils to meet at Bordeaux and talk politics,[3] he had to use Napoleon's Law to prevent it.[4]

Cit. Engels seconded the proposition.[5] He said he knew too little of the promoters of the affair but there was no doubt about Robert Owen. There were things to be found in his writings that had not been superseded yet. He had started from his own ideas, had been originally a manufacturer himself and the first that had stood up against his class to put a stop to the shameful system in which women and children had been employed in factories. He thought the International ought to be represented.

Cit. Engels objected to Mottershead[6] that Locke had been a deist but Owen a materialist. Locke's philosophy had led the French to materialism. He doubted that Owen had been acquainted with the older French writers. He differed entirely from Mottershead. Owen's movement had commenced as early as 1809 and had been independent of anything previously written. In 1812 he had published his book on marriage[7] and 1818 he had gone to the King's Congress at Aix-la-Chapelle to induce them to proclaim Communism. That later the movement had been more in the direction of religion was true to a certain extent but much had been said about social reform. Most of the Owenites had gone over to the middle classes. They had been Chartists but forced into the position of professional agitators and then they had become less reliable and not stuck [to] their principles. He should regret if the festival came off in such a way that we could not take part in it.

Cit. Engels said he had not meant that all the socialists were Chartists but some he had known had been.