---
id: MECW22-026
title: "Statement by the General Council to the Editor of The Times"
volume: 22
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "19 June 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "Source : Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 22 Written on June 19 or 20, 1871 First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XIII, Part II, 1940  Reproduced from the rough ma"
status: raw
---

This statement, written by Marx and edited by Engels, was occasioned by the leading article of The Times on June 19, which libelled the Paris Commune and the International; it extolled Louis Bonaparte's "merits" in suppressing the revolutionary working-class movement. The editor of The Times refused to publish the statement. Engels made some changes in the draft statement written by Marx.

The statement was published in English for the first time in The General Council of the First International. 1870-1871. Minutes, Moscow, 1967, pp. 419-20.

TO THE TIMES

The General Council of this Association has instructed me to state, in reply to your leader of June 19, 1871, on the "International"[1] the following facts.

The pretended Paris manifestoes, published by the ParisJournal[2] and similar journals, manifestoes which you place on the same line as our Address on the Civil war in France, are mere fabrications of the Versailles police.

You say:

"The 'political notes' published by Professor Beesly,[3] and quoted the other day in these columns, are quoted also, with entire approval, in the address of the Council, and we can now understand how justly the Ex-Emperor was entitled to be called the saviour of society."

Now, the Council, in its address, quotes nothing from the "political notes" except the testimony of the writer, who is a known and honourable French savant, as to the personal character of the "Internationals" implicated in the last Paris revolution.[4] What has this to do with the "Ex-Emperor" and the society saved by him! The "programme" of the Association was not, as you say, "prepared" by Messrs. Tolain and Odger "seven years ago". It was issued by the Provisional Council, chosen at the public meeting held at St. Martin's Hall, Long Acre, on 28 September 1864.[5]

M. Tolain has never been a member of that Council, nor was he present at London, when the programme was drawn up.

You say that "Millière" was "one of the most ferocious members of the Commune". Millière has never been a member of the Commune.

"We," you proceed, "should also point out that Assi, lately President of the Association etc."

Assi has never been a member of the "International", and as to the dignity of "President of the Association", it has been abolished as long ago as 1867.[6]