---
id: MECW08-144
title: "Communication Concerning Orders for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung for the First Quarter of 1849"
volume: 8
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 January 1849"
year: 1849
publication: "Published in the Neue Rheinische Zeitung Nos. 172-95, December 19, 1848, January 14 1849 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 8"
status: raw
---

Orders for the Neue Rheinische Zeitung for the next quarter, January to March 1849, should be placed as soon as possible, namely in **Cologne** at the Dispatch Department of the paper (at 17 Hutmacher); **outside** Cologne, at any post-office in Germany.

For France, subscriptions will be accepted by M. G. A. Alexandre, 28 Brandgasse, Strassburg, and at 23 rue Notre Dame de Nazareth, Paris, and by the Royal Chief Post-Office in Aachen; for England by Messrs. /. J. Ewer &Co., 72 Newgate Street, London; for Belgium and Holland by the respective royal post-offices and the post-office in Liege.[1]

By the abolition of the stamp duty the price of the subscription is reduced and from now on this is for Cologne **only 1** taler **17** silver groschen 6 pfennigs; at all Prussian post-offices, postage included, only 1 taler 17 silver groschen per quarter; for subscribers in other parts of Germany a proportional amount for postage is added.

The editorial board remains unchanged.

**The previous months' issues of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung are its programme. Through its personal connections with the heads of the democratic party in England, France, Italy, Belgium and North America the editorial board is able to reflect the political and social movement abroad more correctly and clearly for its readers than any other paper. In this respect the Neue Rheinische Zeitung is the organ not only of German, but of European democracy.**

Advertisements: A brevier line of column width (4 columns per page) or the equivalent space: i silver groschen 6 pfennigs.

Advertisements of all kinds obtain very wide circulation through the many connections of our paper.

**The Responsible Publishers of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung**