---
id: MECW08-008
title: "Cavaignac and the June Revolution"
volume: 8
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 November 1848"
year: 1848
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 8, p. 23; First published: in *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* No. 142 (second edition), November 14, 1848."
status: raw
---

Marx wrote "Cavaignac and the June Revolution" as an editorial introduction to a series of articles published under the tide "Herr Cavaignac" in the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* No. 142 (second edition), No. 145 (special supplement), No. 146, No. 147 (second edition), No. 157 (supplement) and No. 158, November 14, 17, 18 and 19, December 1 and 2, 1848. These articles were reprinted (with certain changes) from the newspaper *La Presse *where they were published from November 7 to 11, 1848, under the general title: "M. Cavaignac devant la Commission d'Enquête sur l'insurrection du 23 Juin", their author being smile Girardin, editor of the newspaper, republican and later follower of Bonaparte.

*E. Girardin* is pitiable in his apologia for the imperialistic cretin *Louis Napoleon*, the "*little constable*";[1] he is likeable in his attacks on *Cavaignac*, the warrior hero of M. Marrast. Since November 7 he has been publishing in consecutive issues a philippic against the *hero of the European bourgeoisie*, which has fallen in love with his Arabian nightcap.[2] Perfidious as this bourgeoisie is, it has sacrificed him to the *Sipehsalar* [supreme commander] *Jellachich,* who is now the *lion* of the European hucksters.

We give our readers in full the *acte d'accusation* made by *La Presse.* In contrast to all European newspapers of great or small format, we have conceived the *June revolution* in a way that history has confirmed. We insist on coming back from time to time to its chief factors and chief *dramatis personae*, since the *June revolution is the centre* around which the European revolution and counter-revolution revolve. The distance from the June revolution, as we stated at the time when it was taking place, marked the zenith of counter-revolution, which had to make its tour of Europe. The return to the June revolution is the real beginning of the European revolution. Therefore, back to *Cavaignac*, to the *inventor of the state of siege.*