---
id: MECW46-139
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 28, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "28 April 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F.Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Algiers,] Friday, 28 April 1882

Dear FRED,

This note is simply to inform you that I shall be leaving Algiers on

[1]

2 May (Tuesday) on the same *Said* and with the same *commandant*.[2] MR Mace, *lieutenant de vaisseau*[3] as brought me to Algiers. Last Wednesday I paid a visit to a French squadron of 6 ironclads; naturally I inspected the flagship, *Le Colbert,* where a petty officer, a handsome, intelligent lad, showed me around and demonstrated everything in detail. As I took my leave he told me in typically French fashion that he was sick of his boring duties and hoped to get his discharge *bientôt*[4] I and my companions (3 *co-locataires*[5] from the Hôtel Victoria) were not allowed on board until after 'duties'. So we watched the manoeuvres of the flagship and the 5 other ironclads from our boat, alias skiff, as we rowed to and fro. There is to be a 'ball' on the *Colbert* tomorrow afternoon. I could have got hold of an invitation card for this, too, through Fermé, but there wasn't time. For on Tuesday (25 *Avril*) I was given my final examination by Stephann; no more *tatouement*[6] with collodion; *quo-ad*[7] a recurrence of pleurisy ALTOGETHER ABSOLVED; however I'm to see him tomorrow (Saturday) at 3 o'clock to get his written diagnosis and take my leave of him. The weather is now very hot on occasion, but IN FACT a hurricane— with sirocco storms coming and going — has persisted (uninterruptedly at night, in repeated gusts during the day) throughout the week (including TO-DAY). That is the reason why my cough has not responded hitherto; HENCE high time to flee Algiers. Best wishes to all.

Your

OLD Moor

Apropos; because of the sun, I have done away with my prophet's beard and my crowning glory but (in deference to my daughters) had myself photographed before offering up my hair on the altar of an Algerian barber. I shall receive the photographs next Sunday (30 April). *Specimina* will be sent to you from Marseilles. On inspection you will observe that, CONSIDERING the 8 whole weeks (during which I did not in fact have one day of complete repose) of painting with collodion (after the manner of Ludwig of Bavaria), *j'ai fait encore bonne mine à mauvais jeu.*[8]