---
id: MECW46-123
title: "Letter to Jenny Longuet, March 16, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "16 March 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published in Russian in the magazine *Nachalo,* No. 5, St Petersburg Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET

IN ARGENTEUIL

[Algiers,] 16 March 1882
Hôtel Victoria

(Go on writing to me here,
aux soins de[1] Fermé)

My Dear Child,

After receiving *your letter through Fermé,* I sent a messenger to the Hôtel d'Orient to make inquiries there as well; he was handed a letter for me from you dated 24 February.

I shall now give you a short account of the state of my health. Since my cough had become more persistent, with severe expecto- ration, insomnia, etc., I sent for Dr Stephann (who also looks after some of my other fellow-lodgers) and have thus been under his care since *26 February* when he first examined me. He is a very shrewd and determined man. He found that, as a result of the unfortunate conca- tenation of events from the time I left Paris until now, my left side, which had been weakened by pleurisy, was functioning abnormally. The chief antidote consists in *vésicatoires*[2] (the drawing off of fluid by painting the left side of my back and the lefthand side of my chest with cantharidic collodion) which works well in my case, and also a 'soothing' cough mixture; lastly, an arsenical preparation (as taste- less as water) to be taken after every meal. *In so far as the weather permit- ted,* I was to continue taking a gentle stroll each morning.

Unfortunately (had the weather been more favourable, my violent coughing would [undoubtedly][3] have gone of its own accord) I be- gan to spit blood on 6 March but, after 8 and 9 March, had a really serious [haemorrhage] with some residual pain until the 12th, and on the 13th *all trace of haemorrhage had gone.* So this disagreeable episode lasted a week; Dr Stephann intervened energetically, forbidding all movement (walks, needless to say); likewise ALMOST all TALK; hot foot- baths, etc., along with drastic medicaments. During this time the treatment with *vésicatoires,* cough TONICS, etc., continued and did, in fact, reduce the coughing quite amazingly. Also, the weather has gra- dually begun to change although not yet ALTOGETHER *comme il faut.*[4]

From my hill-top villa (Hôtel Victoria) I have before me the prospect of the bay and, to one side, villas rising in an amphitheatre —, [finest air], even without a stroll, [wafting] past the little balcony in front of my own and the adjoining *chambres,*[5] or again in the verandah, the latter giving access to the first floor. The doctor will not permit me to resume my strolls until he has again examined the *corpus delictis*[6] Be it noted that latterly not only have I regained my appetite, but have at last managed to *snatch some sleep.* (From the 16th of February, IN FACT SINCE THE NIGHT IN THE hôtel in Paris, I had suffered from insomnia unre- mittingly until the moment referred to above.)

I must tell you that in this Villa-Hôtel, the two ladies, its mana- gers, did everything in my service, no care nor attention neglecting.

And as to the operations relating to the *vésicatoires,* a young *pharmacien,* Mr Casthelaz (with his mother he is here as a patient ever since De- cember) is so kind as to tattoo me, then open the* blisters filled with fluid, *then put linen on the somewhat rough skin, etc. He does all such things in the most genteel way, and offers these voluntary servi- ces in the most delicate manner.*

Nothing could be more magical than the city of Algiers,unless it be the *campagne)[10] * outside that city in summertime [and] before; it would be like the *Arabian Nights,* particularly — given good health — with all my dear ones (in particular not forgetting my GRANDSONS[11] about me. I have been delighted each time you have sent me news of the staunch little fellows; Tussy, too, has written saying that she can't stop thinking about the children, and longs to have them with her again. [It is] hardly likely that I shall be able to leave this place be- fore the month is out, for I must firstly complete the full course of treatment prescribed by Dr Stephann, and not till then (always sup- posing that ALL THEN AS TO WEATHER ALTOGETHER SETTLED) shall I actually be able to commence the actual fresh air treatment.

I have seen nothing of the *Justice* (polemic with *Citoyen),* nor indeed any of the Paris papers save for the *Egalité.* I was very pleased to learn from your letter that Tussy had found a tactful solution to the cata- strophe.[12] If and when Lissagaray launches his *Bataille,* you will, I presume, send me the early numbers; *I do not believe in a great result*; *mais qui vivra verrai*[13]

During my very first days here (while I was still at the Hôtel d'Orient), the GOOD Fermé 'over-walked' me — I mean, set me traips- ing *up hill and down dale,* and likewise *OVERTALKED* me. *A11 this I put at once an end to this, making him understood that I was an invalid.* But he meant very well, and now he knows rest, SOLITUDE and silence to be duties that are incumbent on me as a citizen.

Kisses to all the children. Regards to Longuet. And many kisses to yourself, dear child,

From your

OLD NICK