---
id: MECW46-095
title: "Letter to Nikolai Danielson, December 13, 1881"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 December 1881"
year: 1881
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Minuvshiye gody,* No. 1, St Petersburg, 1908. Reproduced from the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

MARX TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON

IN ST PETERSBURG

London, 13 December 1881

My Dear Friend,

On the second of this month, after a long and painful malady, I lost my wife. I had been with her during the autumn months — as her *garde-malade,*[1] first to the English seaside (Eastbourne), afterwards to Argenteuil (about 20 minutes from Paris) where she and myself enjoyed together the great pleasure to be with our eldest daughter (Madame Longuet) and her 4 little boys[2] (the eldest about 5 years), all exceedingly attached to their grandparents.

It was a very risky affair, on my part, to undertake this voyage to Paris, considering the enfeebled state of my dear wife. But trusting to my excellent friend, Dr Donkin, I dared it in order to procure her this last satisfaction!

Unfortunately, my own health having been more or less shaky during all this time, I suddenly underwent — after our return to London — an attack of bronchitis complicated by a pleurisy, so that during 3 out of the last 6 weeks of her life, I could not see my wife, although we were in two rooms contiguous to each other.

Till now I was not yet able to leave my house. I was very near 'leaving this bad world'. The doctors want to send me to the south of France or even to Algeria.

The letters of condolence I have received from all sides were so far a great source of consolation for me, as there rang through them (ex- cept a single *Russian* letter) a true ring of sympathy, of true acknowl- edgment and understanding of the rare qualities of my dear wife.

My German editor[3] informs me that a third edition of the *Capital* has become necessary. This comes at a moment anything but oppor- tune. In the first instance I must first be restored to health, and in the second I want to finish off the 2nd vol. (even if to be published abroad) as soon as possible. I have now the additional interest to have it ready in order to inscribe in it a dedication to my wife.

However that may be, I will arrange with my editor that I shall make for the 3d edition only the fewest possible alterations and addi- tions, but, on the other hand, that he must this time only draw off 1,000 copies, instead of 3,000, as was his want. When these 1,000 co- pies forming the 3d edition are sold, then I may change the book in the way I should have done at present under different circumstances. Believe me always

Your true friend

A. Williams[4]