---
id: MECW46-117
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 21, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 February 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 First published in English in: K. Marx, *Critique of the Gotha Programme,* Lawrence, London, [1933]. Reprod"
status: raw
---

TO ENGELS IN LONDON

[Postcard, unsigned]

Alger,[1] 21 February 1882
Hôtel d'Orient

Dear Fred,

I left Marseilles on Saturday 18 February at 5 in the afternoon aboard the *Said,* EXCELLENT STEAMER; the PASSAGE was a fast one, so that we had already reached Algiers by half past three in the morning on Monday (20 February).[2] However, it was a chilly crossing and, though the ship was equipped with every comfort, the 2 nights were sleepless ones for me owing to the diabolical noise of the engines, wind, etc., which were disturbing in the cabin.

Here again, I found in store for me the same *quid pro quo, mutatis mutandis*[3] as in the Isle of Wight.[4] This particular SEASON happens to be, for Algiers, exceptionally cold and wet, while Nice and Menton are presently luring away most of its visitors! I had in any case had some misgivings and more than once hinted at the possibility of starting off *d'abord*[5] with the Riviera. However it would seem to be *a fatalité*[6] The good *juge*[7] gave me a most friendly welcome yesterday; Longuet's letter had forewarned him the day before I arrived; he is calling on me today to consider future moves. Then I shall write at greater length. Kindest regards to all. Letters aren't dispatched every day to France and England.

Write to me under my name, *Aux soins de* Monsieur Fermé, *juge au tribunal civil,*[8] No. 37, Route Mustapha Supérieur, Alger.

[On the side reserved for the address]

Fr. Engels, Esq.

122 Regent's Park Road, *Londres,* N. W. Angleterre