---
id: MECW46-141
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, May 3, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 May 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 Extract published in *Marx & Engels on the Irish Question*, Progress Publishers, Moscow 1971, p.333; Published in Marx-Engels"
status: raw
---

*To Bernstein in Zurich*

Dear Mr Bernstein,

Could you not send me some additional offprints of the article on early Christianity[1] or further copies of the relevant issue? I should like to have them very much and they would come in useful for propaganda purposes. I should send them to people who don't otherwise see the *Sozialdemokrat*; 3 or 4 would suffice.

Encl. a note which is of interest in that it gives evidence of the colossal speed with which the concentration of capitals is taking place in America. UNITED STATES BONDS are *Staatsschuldscheine der Vereinigten Staaten*. N.Y.C. and H.R. STOCK are the shares of the NEW YORK CENTRAL and HUDSON RIVER Railroad; REAL ESTATE = *Grundbesitz*.

A dollar is slightly more than 4 marks = roughly 4 marks = 5 frs. Delighted to see that people everywhere are supporting the Sozialdemokrat against the whines of the milksops.

Darwin's letter was of course addressed to Marx and was an extremely kind one. But beware of the article by Lafargue in the *Citoyen* of 28 April on '*La sélection darwinienne et les classes régnantes*' which he concludes with the discovery of a new Amphioxus; it's too funny for words. Lafargue is in Paris and I have just written to him2 8 4 pouring frightful scorn on his *Amphioxus Lafargii*.

Best wishes.

Yours,

F. E.

Don't let the Association[2] here deceive you about the Democratic Federation.[3] So far it is of no account whatever. It is headed by an ambitious candidate for Parliament by the name of Hyndman, an ex-Conservative, who can get together a big meeting only with the help of the Irish and for specifically Irish purposes. Even then he plays only a third-rate part, otherwise the Irish would give it to him.

Gladstone has discredited himself terribly. His whole Irish policy has suffered shipwreck. He has to drop Forster and the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, Cowper-Temple (whose stepfather is Palmerston), and must say a *pater peccavi*:[4]

The Irish M.P.s[5] have been set free, the Coercion Bill has not been extended, the back rents of the farmers are to be partly cancelled and partly taken over by the state against fair amortisation.[6] On the other hand the Tories have already reached the stage where they want to save whatever can still be saved: before the farmers *take *the land they should redeem the rents with the aid of the state, according to the Prussian model, so that the landowners may get at least *something! *The Irish are teaching our leisurely John Bull to get a move on. That's what comes from shooting![7]