---
id: MECW46-236
title: "Letter to Eleanor Marx, January 10, 1883"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 January 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (German), in *Annali,* an. I, Milano, 1958 Printed according to the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ELEANOR MARX

IN LONDON

[Ventnor,] 10 January 1883

Dear Child,

The enclosed letter from Lafargue (be so kind as to send it back sometime) reassured me greatly on Jennychen's account, although Lafargue may have painted too rosy a picture out of consideration for me; but it does seem as though the immediate danger is over.

Charming, the accounts of Wolf and Papa (who is now an IDOLATER OF Wolfs), etc.

As things are at present (and Engels agrees with me over this) it would be a most unfavourable moment to send Johnny off to Argenteuil. He *cannot go back* until Jenny is again in a condition to look after her household. All one must concentrate on is the main issue, not lesser considerations, and it was those that were very nearly the death of Jenny. What difference would a few months here or there make, quite apart from the fact that the poor boy would, from the start, be precipitated into chaos.

I hope, Tussychen, that you will at once write to Jennychen telling her what I have said. I shall today drop Longuet a line on this subject, addressed to the *Justice.*

You must let Johnnychen have news of his brothers[1] and sister; you will, OF COURSE, also give Lenchen the main gist of Lafargue's letter.

Yesterday the weather was horrible; today, too, it looks damp and far from 'glorious'. But I shall, I think, [take] my 'CONSTITUTIONAL' today [...][2]