---
id: MECW46-199
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, November 6, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 November 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

Dear Moor,

Today I got a note from Laura in which she tells me that the fate of the *Egalité* will not be decided until tomorrow;[1] prospects, however, are most favourable.

Have you seen today's *Standard*? Telegram from Frankfurt[2] to the effect that, since Ignatiev's arrival in Paris, there have been renewed attempts — initially, it would seem, of a fairly lukewarm kind — at a Russo-French compromise: if France were to do something more about the extradition of dynamiters,[3] Russia would vigorously back up France in Tunis, Egypt, etc. So that explains the police campaign in France! We shall see if anything of a relevant nature is submitted to the Chambers.

Lafargue has sent me the *Proletaire* containing the indictment of himself, Guesde, etc., which was read out at St-Etienne.[4] A truly Bakuninist concoction, but otherwise weak: its strongest props are mutually contradictory letters, written on the spur of the moment by *Lafargue to Malon*, and calmly reproduced by the latter without, it would seem, any fear of the same being done to *his* letters by Russia and France. Frankfurt, Sunday Night', The Standard, No. 18191, 6 November 1882.

Lafargue. Nor is he wrong; these gentlemen have made opportune use of their material and were Lafargue then to come out with Malon's letters, it would be *moutarde après dîner*.;[5] I shall send you the thing tomorrow. But you must let me have it back for the sake of Bernstein, against whom I may well make use of it. In place of what I asked for, or along with it, the latter has proposed to send a small library of books about factory legislation, something which I can only hope I have nipped in the bud in good time[6] I expect to get the Swiss Factory Act[7] any day now and shall order for you the latest German trade regulations which contain the provisions for factories.

No other news here.

Your

F. E.

First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913

Printed according to the original

Published in English for the first time

**199. MARX TO ENGELS[8] **

**IN LONDON**

[Ventnor,] 8 November 1882

Dear Fred,

What do you think of Deprez' experiment at the Munich Electricity Exhibition?[9] It was almost a year ago that Longuet promised to procure Deprez' works for me (notably his demonstration that electricity makes it possible to convey energy over considerable distances by means of a simple telegraph wire).[10] For a close friend of Deprez', Dr D'Arsouval, is a contributor to the *Judicat* and has published this and that about Deprez' investigations. Longuet, as is his wont, is always forgetting.

I greatly enjoyed looking at the 'paper' you sent in which Sher-