---
id: MECW46-202
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, November 9, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 November 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published abridged in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere*, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and"
status: raw
---

TO SORGE IN HOBOKEN

London, 9 November 1882

Dear Sorge,

I have paid for *The Labour Standard* up till 3 December, 4/5d., and advised Shipton to send all future accounts to me.[1] Should you wish to cancel the subscription, perhaps you would let me have prompt notification.

Marx was here for 3 weeks, very much better; all he needs now is decent air and careful treatment. His minor ailments have been vanquished to the extent that he will certainly be rid of them next summer. The main thing is to get him through the winter without a recurrence of PLEURISY, and for that reason he has gone to Ventnor in the ISLE OF Wight.[2] whence I have just received a line or two from him.[3] So far as circumstances permit, the 3rd edition[4] will now be taken vigorously in hand there and won't, I trust, occupy too much time. For the rest he was very cheerful and sprightly and, if all goes well until next autumn, he will be stronger than he has been for years.

My thanks with regard to Lilienthal. I now know the man as well as if we had been at school together.

I'm glad to hear that your Adolph[5] is getting on well; I trust he will soon find a LINE that will give him the opportunity he wants of getting on quickly. His letters have arrived but, like many others, unfortunately still remain unanswered.

Hepner is a proper Schlemihl;[6] moreover his campaigns, like the one he is waging against Schewitsch, are too much concerned with hair-splitting. Who, after all, is going to wax so enthusiastic about 'German culture'! He really ought to familiarise himself with American culture first. But that is typically German. Here we have someone arriving from a small town in the depths of Germany who cannot wait to enlighten America. However America will BREAK him IN all right and, since he has talent, and at one time also possessed a great deal of gumption, he may yet prove very useful.

16 November

That shows you what things are like here. Having had to break off a week ago I have only today got round to continuing this and, I trust, finishing it off.

Lafargue has been in Paris ever since the spring; his wife[7] followed later, during the summer; she spent a month with Marx in Vevey.[8] For Marx had first been in Algiers,[9] then in Monte Carlo (Monaco)[10] and in both places had suffered a recurrence of PLEURISY. After that he stayed with the Longuets in Argenteuil[11] where he availed himself of the sulphur springs at nearby Enghien for his chronic bronchitis. Then to Vevey and finally back here.

You might like to know that Lafargue (with a great deal of assistance from me, since he had absolutely no intention of learning German from his wife) has published in French 3 chapters from my *Anti-Dühring* (introduction and the two first chapters of Part III 'Socialism') under the title *Socialisme utopique et socialisme scientifique*..[12] It made a tremendous impression in France. Most people are too lazy to read stout tomes such as Capital and hence a slim little pamphlet like this has a much more rapid effect. I shall now publish the thing in German — with insertions calculated to give it a strong popular appeal; the ms. is already in Zurich and the first sheet has been printed.[13] I shall send it to you as soon as it is ready. Meanwhile you have, of course, in Dr Stiebeling a purveyor of popular knowledge to America *in utraque lingua*[14] He is a well-meaning man but no theorist and accordingly he is somewhat muddle-headed.

The *Egalité* is now appearing daily *and* weekly. Whether the daily edition (in place of the *Citoyen* which our people were chucked out of thanks to a financial *coup*)[15] can keep going depends upon negotiations with a man of means. The *Sozialdemokrat* is being much too weakkneed in regard to the split between our people and Malon, but the smooth, cunning, rascally Malon (one of the 17 founders of Bakunin's secret 'Alliance')[16] has so ingratiated himself with the Germans in Paris and our people have made a number of such colossal blunders that the Paris people are doing their utmost to bring pressure to bear on Zurich. What's more, Liebknecht also intrigued with Malon when passing through Paris on his way home from here. If, however, Lafargue and Guesde commit some altogether too extravagant follies, I shall talk the *Sozialdemokrat* round, never fear.

Your

F. E.