---
id: MECW46-174
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 24, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 August 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, 1931 and printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN GREAT YARMOUTH

Lausanne, 24.August 1882 Hôtel du Nord

DEAR [Fred],[1]

Yesterday, on from Dijon to Lausanne,[2] wet and relatively cold. Nine o'clock at night arrived at Lausanne in the rain. First ques- tion I asked the waiter: 'How long has it been raining here?' Reply: 'Only been wet for 2 days' (i.e. since the day I left Paris). *C'est drôle!*[3]

Today we shall look round in Vevey, Montreux, etc., for some- where to stay. *In the meantime* write to Lausanne, *poste restante.* I should like to have a timely supply of extra MUNITION so that some may always be available against any and every eventuality. Address letters to Dr Charles Marx, not Karl Marx.

Longuet remained true to his own self till the day of my departure. For during both my previous visits to Argenteuil,[4] Longuet kept promising the translator of *Capital,* that poor devil Roy, to arrange a meeting with me; on neither occasion was Longuet able to find a suitable time. And on this occasion, when Longuet again started to maunder on about my meeting Roy, I told him he might arrange it at any time during the last 4 weeks. *Eh bien!*[5] *Not until the day of my depar- ture* when I had to pack, pay a farewell call on Dr Dourlen and still had a great deal to discuss with Jennychen, etc., does Longuet go off to Paris without my prior knowledge, pick up Roy and bring him back to *déjeuner*[6] (1 o'clock) in Argenteuil. There was a chilly north- east wind and, as a result of my obligatory CONVERSATION with POOR Roy in the garden, I caught cold. THANKS TO Longuet!

Apropos. A German who is Paris correspondent to a lot of bour- geois German newspapers wrote to me as my most humble and obe- dient servant, saying that, while honesty demanded I should know that he was not a Social Democrat, still less correspondent to newspa- pers ofthat complexion, people in all circles of German 'society' were anxious to have official news of my health; therefore requested TO INTERVIEW me at Argenteuil, etc.

O F COURSE, I DID NOT REPLY TO THAT SOFTSAWDER PENMAN. Love to all.

Moor

I shall go and see OLD Becker[7] and Wrôblewski in Geneva as soon as my cough has eased up again.