---
id: MECW46-189
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, October 9, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "9 October 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (German), in *Annali*, an. I, Milano, 1958 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

MARX TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

[London,] 9 October 1882

41 Maitland Park Road, N. W.

Dear Cacadou,

The weather over here isn't bad, i. e. there are a few reasonably fine hours when the sun is shining brightly; for the rest a cloudy sky

[1][2]

and occasional showers of rain; not cold generally speaking and the old, familiar fog only in the mornings and evenings.

Schorlemmer came up to London on Saturday,[3] just for a friendly reunion; he has got to return to Manchester this evening, since he has to 'perpetrate' a lecture there tomorrow. He sends you his kindest re- gards.

Engels is most annoyed at not having been sent the *Egalité* for many months past, nor is my copy of that paper now being des- patched to London. How much is the subscription to the *Citoyen,* incl. postage to London? I forgot about it when I left Paris and shall send a MONEY ORDER immediately on hearing from you.

Yesterday we dined with Engels; Pumps was there too, OF COURSE, with her BABY[4] and Percy.[5] The BABY is very cheerful and her conversa- tion livelier than that of her *maman* — at all events.

Yesterday evening Donkin came to see me, but won't be giving me a medical examination until later this week; he thought I was looking better. He considers the ISLE OF Wight to be the best place for me to stay during the approaching FOG TIME OF England.

Johnny is cheerful and, on the whole, 'HAPPY', although it's touching how often he speaks of his *maman*[6] and Harry. Under Tussy's guid- ance he has once again acquired the habit of washing himself from head to foot in 'cold water' every morning. His 'well-being' leaves nothing to be desired; going to bed regularly at an early hour (8 p. m.) also suits him. His learning has progressed as far as 'capital letters', likewise to deciphering the large Roman numerals on clocks.

I am most anxious that you should send me news of Jenny's STATE, personal and domestic. Is the Longuet FAMILY[7] back yet?

The great agitator, St Paul,[8] will, OF COURSE, again be enthroned on the heights of the Boulevard de Port-Royal.[9] Write and tell me about his ADVENTURES, but above all about yourself—how you are and how things are going.

My cough is still tiresome, but more as a *MEMENTO* that I have got to throw it off completely if I am to become ALTOGETHER fit for action again.

Lenchen and Johnny send their love.

Farewell, Cacadou, my trusty and beloved travelling com- panion,

OLD NICK