---
id: MECW46-261
title: "Letter to Charles Longuet, October 31, 1880"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: "Jenny Marx Longuet"
written: "31 October 1880"
year: 1880
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 34, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

LETTER TO CHARLES LONGUET

IN PARIS

[London,] 31 October 1880

... I had the *Justice* with your two articles in it last night, and feel quite elated to see what excellent use you have made of the matter I sent you. Your article on the frontier must create a sensation, what you disclose is quite new in France, and even little known in England, because intentionally suppressed. And then the form you give to heavy stuff is so amusing and sarcastic, that even the French reader will not consider the matter too dry. The pity is, that you always send me one copy, and that I am not able to send a paper to Collet, which would keep my correspondence with that short-armed but long-sighted individual alive and procure for you an abstract of the intrigues now going on, and save you the trouble of reading blue books yourself: I also want the first article[1] on the Berlin Treaty for Collet. Papa was greatly pleased with your article — he had often grumbled at childish notes in the *Justice* on the delays caused by the Turks etc.— delays in reality skilfully brought about by the Russians! Papa also liked your article on Girardin and relished the quotation *sur le mâle et l'âne*[2] from Proudhon.— But I am *sure you* relished still more the pleasure of quoting the name of your master than the quotation itself!!! Am I right?

I am sorry to think you should have taken the trouble to translate what I sent you on Ireland. I never intended you to do that, fancying that you would take parts here and there and scribble down in an hour at most some sort of correspondence. As you make such a serious matter of it, I shall not send any more of my productions. They would only waste your time. My intention had been to save your time by reading much matter referring to Ireland for you. It is so long ago since I sent you my letter, that I do not remember what I wrote, but fancy the news will be too stale now.

I have not read Roy's articles. Papa considers the second one to be superior to anything that has hitherto been published on Littré.

Love and kisses from all.

Your

Jenny