---
id: MECW46-122
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 3, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "3 March 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel Zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Postcard]

[Algiers,] 3 March 1882

Dear FRED,

Your letter dated 25 February 284 arrived yesterday together with the *Daily News* CUTS (O. N.[1] *tragicomical* secret of politics and passion in England). I trust Tussy will at last stop playing fast and loose with her health; that Cacadou, alias Laurachen, continues to flourish, for she is subjected to a great deal of physical exertion. As yet no reply from Paris.

The *tempête*—*c'est ici l'expression sacramentale*[2] — has been going on since 26 February though always with VARIABLE ASPECTS.

*On 2 March* confined to the house FOR THE WHOLE DAY in common with all my fellow-lodgers; pouring rain from EARLY MORNING from a SKY of a colour reminiscent of London, grey as grey; this time however the squalls were accompanied by thunder and lightning; at 4 o'clock in the afternoon an azure sky AGAIN; later on a really lovely moonlit eve- ning. One short spell alternating with another throughout the day, now a rise in temperature, now a drop. Meanwhile I resumed inter alia the painting of my skin; that very night A REMARKABLE IMPROVEMENT SETTING IN.— *This morning,* 3 March, painting first task of the day; de- spite wind not intimidated, from 9 o'clock to ABOUT quarter TO 11 out for a stroll in the balmy sea air which I found MOST DELIGHTFUL; got back just before the wind worked itself into a fury again. I shall be

SUMMONED TO *dejeuner*[3] IN A FEW MINUTES and am making use of this vital moment to send these FEW LINES TO YOU.

Your

Moor

[On the side reserved for the address]

Fr. Engels

122 Regent's Park Road, London, N. W., Angleterre