---
id: MECW46-138
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, April 21, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "21 April 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Book I, Moscow, 1924 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 21 April 1882

Dear Mr Bernstein,

I am sending you a piece from the *Kölner Zeitung* on 'Baron Hirsch'.[1] It is significant that *bourgeois* papers should find it necessary to denounce such a trickster. The whole article is worth reprinting if space is available. It would make a splendid feuilleton, particularly as emanating from the *Kölnische Zeitung.* If you can't reprint it in its entirety, perhaps you would return it to me when you have done with it. You might also return me the ms. of the 'Preface'[2] sometime.

Let me elucidate: Mahmud *Nedim* Pasha is, like Mahmud Damat Pasha (the Sultan's[3] brother-in-law), Russia's chief paid agent in Constantinople. When the Russian, Poliakov, who was also after the Turkish railway concessions, had failed to get them (for the Russians could not start a war against Turkey and *simultaneously* con the Turks), it was naturally of the utmost concern to the Russians to see to it that the terms imposed upon the Austrian, Hirsch, who was the sole competitor and, what's more, Austria's *protégé,* were of such a kind as to make Hirsch, and with him Austria, hated in Turkey and to prevent Turkey from getting a coherent railway network after all. Besides, anything that weakened Turkey financially was advantageous to Russia — relatively speaking. So Nedim does his deal. Hirsch pays him for selling Turkey to *him* and Russia pays him again just for selling Turkey. The fact is that Russian diplomacy does business in the grand manner, with none of your small shopkeeper's niggardly, envious eye to his competitors and hence, if there's no other way of doing it, it can even permit an adversary like Austria an apparent or momentary advantage and nevertheless turn this to its own account. Kindest regards to you and Kautsky.

Yours,

F. E.