---
id: MECW46-204
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, November 11, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 November 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN VENTNOR

London, 11 November 1882

Dear Moor,

I was able to show Tussy your letter[1] on the evening it arrived, for in the morning Lenchen and Johnny had gone to Percy's[2] OFFICE to watch the LORD MAYORS SHOW and in the evening we all foregathered at Pumps's for DINNER. Johnny was very charming and Pumps's gosling very well-behaved.

I am very glad you should have found a pleasant doctor^0; it is always better if a convalescent has someone like that at hand, and what good can it do if every trifle must first be referred back here? I trust the rheumatism and cough are now on the mend.

Today I am sending you 2 *Egalités* and one weekly ditto. The manifesto of the (Lyons) Conseil national^4 3 5 will convince you that the Lyonnais are still the typical louts they have always been. No further news about the progress of the negotiations with the Parisian capitalist, so nothing would appear to have been settled yet.

The rudeness with which Dilke replies to awkward questions^4 3 6 is indeed striking, but seems very much to the taste of the bunch of liberal parvenus who sit behind him. Well, they'll feel the *cloture*[3] soon enough. The business in Gibraltar^4 ' 2 stinks more every day; the extradition was ordered, not only by the police, but also by a magistrate, i. e. *a. judge,* and the Governor reads about it in the paper and doesn't lift a finger! Meanwhile the Russians are encroaching more and more on Persia and Afghanistan and building roads to Meshed in Persia and from Samarkand via Bukhara to Balkh (the Bactria of the Ancients) in Afghanistan, while their intrigues in Turkey are such that not even Aleko Pasha, their protégé in East Rumelia, can swallow them. But neither big Gladstone nor little Dilke have any eyes for this. The Russians certainly have something in mind for next spring. But the kind of credit they enjoy will be evident to you from the announcement of the Poti-Baku Railway's Preference Loan. They have to use a company as a cloak and, moreover, on what terms!

Vollmar has opened his pro-Malon campaign in the *Sozialdemokrat*— Malon's promptings being instantly recognisable in the saccharine tone of the apologia with which the article concludes.[4]

But what do you think of Wilhelm's^b panegyric of Bennigsen in the *Justice?* It's really laid on a bit thick, even for the worthy Wilhelm.

The Swiss Factory Act 4 0 3 also goes off in today's parcel. I shall ask Bernstein for Oldenburg's article^c at the earliest opportunity. Bernstein will probably think twice before writing to me; I made such good use of his own arguments to refute his conclusions concerning the French business that he is unlikely to find very much more to say.[5]

Now, with the closure of the debate, the House of Commons has sunk wholly to the level of a continental Chamber which, in view of its present composition, is the position best suited to it.

I am very curious to hear more about the experiment made by Deprez at Munich.[6] However, I completely fail to understand how, in that case, laws for estimating resistance in wires hitherto regarded as valid and still applied in practice by engineers (in their calculations) can continue in force. Hitherto it has heen calculated that, given the same conductive material, resistance *increases* in proportion as the diameter of the conducting wire *decreases.* I wish Longuet could be induced to cough up those things. For this means that the vast and hitherto untapped sources of hydraulic power have suddenly become exploitable.

But now I must pack up the papers. All well here.

Your

F.E.