---
id: MECW46-144
title: "Letter to Jenny Longuet, May 8, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 May 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published, in Russian, in the magazine *Nachalo,* No. 5, St Petersburg, 1899 Printed according to the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET

IN ARGENTEUIL

Monte Carlo, 8 May 1882 Hôtel de Russie, Monte Carlo

Dear Jennychen,

The said *Monte Carlo,* whence I send you these lines, is one of the 3 places (adjoining one another) whose trinity constitutes the state of 'Monaco' (i.e. Monaco, Condamine and Monte Carlo). A really beautiful situation. Climate preferable to that of Nice or even Men- ton.

I need hardly say that with comical consistency I imported into the region *the first 2 rainy days* (since January); it would seem that they were only awaiting my arrival from Algiers for this to happen. Apart from that I struck magnificent weather.

As you will have learnt from my last letter,[1] I am quit of my pleu- risy; the bronchial catarrh can only clear up very gradually. More- over the atmosphere will soon be warm and dry *everywhere* (which, however, raises fears of a water shortage); the intensity of the sun's ac- tion will be all the greater for its being strewn with large spots. So everywhere there will soon be the kind of weather I need.

As I am not sure how long I shall be staying here, I should like you to let me know at once from Paris *where* I can find you; it would be best if you *telegraphed* me here, for a telegram will give me sufficient in- formation in 3 or 4 words.

Lots of kisses for the children.

Your

OLD Moor