---
id: MECW46-148
title: "Letter to Eleanor Marx, May 21, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 May 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published, in Russian, in the magazine *Voinstvuyushchiy materialist,* Book IV Reproduced from the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ELEANOR MARX

IN LONDON

[Postcard]

Monte Carlo (Monaco), 21 May 1882

Hôtel de Russie

Dearest Child,

Your being my oldest creditor, I had in fact intended writing to- day (Sunday) a long letter, but *l'homme propose, mais le thermomètre dispose. Il y a aujourd'hui un jour parfaitement beau, mais* exceptionnel: *donc je veux l'exploiter en air libre, au lieu 'd'écrire', et de ne pas écrire le soir. C'est convenu avec mes conseillers de santé.*[1]

Before leaving *ami*[2] Fermé, I told him: On landing at the Southern coast of France, the weather at once will come out a turn-coat. And indeed — so 'fatal' a man I pride myself upon this my quality — the prophecy has been partially fulfilled. From the *beginning of January* the Riviera enjoyed a summer weather never so brilliant, some grumblers only complaining of an absolute lack of rain almost. The moment I arrived on the 4th May at Marseille, there set in rain, lasting some- times a whole, more generally a half day, and mostly during the nights; a general lowering of temperature; then and there cold winds; altogether changeable, variable weather; atmosphere, even if not of- ten, too saturated with aqueous vapours. With all that, here *a rela- tively good warm weather,* only not so dry and more constant than I want just now for my lungs. But nowhere in Italy or elsewhere you will find it a better one now: Cannes, Monte Carlo and Mentone are the three most healthsome places, of the most *equable* and *on an average* — warmer temperature than Nizza, Rome and Naples.

Yours,

Old Nick

[On the side reserved for the address]

Miss Marx

41 Maitland Park Road

Maitland *Park*

London (N.W.) *(Angleterre)*