---
id: MECW46-121
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 1, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "1 March 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original in Marx-Eng"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

*Algiers,* 1 March 1882 Hôtel Pension Victoria, Mustapha Supérieur, Boulevard Bon Accueil

(Letters can now be sent to me direct at the above address)

DEAR FRED,

The telegram[1] I sent you anticipated my POSTCARD/ as the latter would have caused somewhat unnecessary anxiety. The fact is that thanks to an accumulation of unfavourable circumstances of a petty nature (incl. the sea crossing), I have been frozen to the marrow, my *corpus delicti*[2] having landed at Algiers on 20 February.

December was an atrocious month in Algiers, January fine, February cold when not also damp. I struck the 3 coldest days of the said last month, the 20th, 21st and 22nd of February. No sleep, no appetite, a bad cough, somewhat perplexed, not without an occasional bout of *profunda melancolia,* like the great Don Quixote. AT ONCE THEN back to Europe, no go, what with the *faux frais,*[3] on top of which the prospect of another 2 nights in one of the *cabines,* one's brain tortured by the racket from the engines! Or again, certain escape from the *quid pro quo*[4] by setting off at once for Biskra, right next to the Sahara Desert? But difficult, considering the fact that the means of communication or transport demand a further journey of 7 to 8 days and, according to the advice of someone familiar with the conditions, no small undertaking for a *pro nunc*[5] invalid in view of possible INCIDENTS before arrival in Biskra!

Anyway, as the thermometer on the *après-midi*[6] of 22 February indicated fair weather and I had already spied out the Hôtel-Pension Victoria on the day of my arrival in company with the good JUDGE Fermé, I left the Grand Hôtel d'Orient (also *sleeping* there THE ABOMINABLE PHILOSOPHICAL RADICAL Ashton Dilke — BY THE BY, to *le Petit Colon* and other *petits journaux Algériens*[7] every Englishman is A LORD, EVEN Bradlaugh FIGURES HERE AS LORD Bradlaugh) with *bagage* to *une des collines en dehors de la fortification, du côté de l'Est de la ville.*[8]

Magnificent position here, from my *chambre*;[9] the bay of the MEDITERRANEAN, the port of Algiers, villas climbing up the *collines* as in an amphitheatre *(des ravines au dessous des collines, d'autres collines au dessus)*[10] further away, *des montagnes,*[11] among those *visibles* being the snowy crests *derrière Matifou, sur les montagnes de Kabilie, des points culminants du Djurdjura.*[12] (All the aforementioned *collines* are of limestone.) At 8 o'clock in the morning there is nothing more magical than the panorama, the air, the vegetation, a wonderful *mélange* of Europe and Africa. Every morning — at 10 or 9-11 or THEREABOUTS MY PROMENADE between *des ravines et les collines situées au dessus de la mienne*[13]

WITH ALL THAT one lives on nothing but dust. IN FIRST INSTANCE only FROM 23-26TH FEBR. REALLY EXCELLENT CHANGE; but now (and nevertheless I'm still *so frozen that EVEN THEN the only difference* between my clothing in the Isle of Wight and my clothing in the city of Algiers is that in the villa I have up till now simply replaced the rhinoceros greatcoat with my light *greatcoat,* no other change having been made so far) there began (and will doubtless last for some 9 days reckoned from the 27th Feb.) the so-called *tempête, c.a.d. le tapage du vent sans de tonnerre et sans d'éclairs*[14] DANGEROUS AND TREACHEROUS TIME MUCH FEARED EVEN BY THE NATIVES. SO in fact only 3 really fine days up till now.

Meanwhile, my cough got worse FROM DAY TO DAY, *le crachement abominable,*;[15] little sleep, above all a certain nasty feeling that my *left side* is once for all deteriorated by the perish, and my intellectual state most dejected. Thus I summoned Dr Stephann (best Algiers doctor). I had two interviews yesterday and to-day. What to do? I am just go[ing] to Algiers to make prepare his prescriptions given; they are, after he had very seriously examined me, 1. *collodion cantharidal*[16] applied with a *pinceau*[17] 2. *arseniate de soude*[18] in a specific quantity of water; 1 tablespoon of same at every mealtime; 3. *au cas de besoin,*[19] especially if the cough comes on at night, a tablespoonful of a MIXTURE *of codéine* and *julep gommeux.*[20] He is coming again in a week's time; as to my BODILY EXERCISES, has ordered me to keep within very moderate limits; no real intellectual work except some reading for my distraction. So in fact I shan't be back AT London A BIT (RATHER A LESS) sooner! Hence a man ought never [to] delude himself by too sanguine views!

I must break off as I have to go to the chemist in Algiers. By the by, you know that few people more averse to demonstrative pathos; still, it would be a lie [not] to confess that my thought to great part absorbed by reminiscence of my wife, such a part of my best part of life! Tell my London daughters[21] to write to Old Nick[22] instead of expecting him to write himself first.

How is Pumps going on in that serious work of man-creating? Give her my best compliments.

Give my compliments to Helen,[23] ditto Moore, Schorlemmer. Now, old good fellow,

Yours,

Moor

Apropos! Dr Stephann, like my dear Dr Donkin, does not forget— the cognac