---
id: MECW46-240
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, February 8, 1883"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "8 February 1883"
year: 1883
publication: "First published, in Russian, in Marx-Engels Archives, Book I, Moscow, 1924 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46, p. 432"
status: raw
---

To Bernstein in Zurich

London, 8 February 1883

Dear Mr Bernstein,

1. I trust you have received the final ms. (*The Mark*) which was sent off from here registered on 20 December. But the printing delays are now getting really too outrageous. If it goes on like this you had better reset the title and put 1884 on it. When, exactly, will there be another sheet?

2. I have received — *neither* the first Accident Bill, *nor* Bebel's speech on the subject. Meanwhile it has struck me that a specific attack on Bismarckian socialism has become outdated.[1] Viereck's little paper[2] has lost all inclination for it. Singer, who had been suffering badly from nationalisation mania on the last occasion but one, was, on the last occasion, completely free of it and genuinely revolutionary,[3] while as for those weaklings in the Reichstag, Bios, Geiser & Co., their courage, if not their enthusiasm, would appear to have evaporated. So why crack a nut with a sledgehammer? I think we should let Bismarckian socialism dig its own grave. After which all that remains is a criticism of the rotten Lassallean remnants. But if the pamphlet[4] is printed so slowly, this attack, too, may have ceased to be topical by the time the thing comes out.

3. You are mistaken about Malon. The man is not as stupid, or rather as naive, as he makes himself out to be. C'est un faux bonhomme'[5] who has learnt from the Bakuninists how to manipulate people on the sly while making out that it is he himself who is being manipulated. One of these days you will see that I am right.

4. Stock exchange tax. Has long existed here in England in the form of a simple, everyday stamp on the transfer document — ½% of the amount paid and 5/- transfer fee (securities *au porteur*[6] are rare over here; they are free). The only consequence is that the *real* speculation on the stock exchange is in margin dealings where no actual transfer takes place. Hence only affects the so-called 'solid capital investment'. Nor has anything ever been devised that the stock market speculators cannot circumvent.

I am against it, 1. because we, after all, demand only *direct* taxation, rejecting *any* that is indirect, so that the people may know and sense what they are paying, and also so that capital can be got at in this way, 2. because we certainly cannot vote one penny to this government.

You are right in describing the outcry against the stock exchange as petty-bourgeois. The stock exchange simply adjusts the *distribution* of the surplus value *already stolen* from the workers, and how that is done may at first be a matter of indifference to the workers as such. However the stock exchange adjusts this distribution in the direction of centralisation, vastly accelerates the concentration of capitals and is therefore as revolutionary as the steam engine.

Equally petty-bourgeois, though perhaps just excusable, are taxes with a moral purpose — beer, spirits. In this context they are quite ludicrous and altogether reactionary. Had the stock exchange in America not created colossal fortunes, how would large-scale industry and a social movement have been possible in that land of farmers?

It would be quite a good idea if you were to lash out here. But with circumspection. There must be no gap in one's defences where your Stoeckers are concerned.

5. 3rd edition of *Capital*.,[7] Will doubtless take some time yet as Marx is still ailing. His stay in Ventnor, where it rained continuously, did him no good. On top of that there has been the loss of his daughter.[8] He has been back here for the past 3 weeks and is so hoarse that he can barely speak, so not much could be discussed (only don't mention this in the paper[9] of course).

6. We should be grateful for the Rodbertus-Meyer book.[10] At one time the man was almost on the point of discovering surplus value, but his estate in Pomerania prevented him from doing so.

Very many thanks for the photograph.

Kautsky has sent me his pamphlet on American grain. Choice irony: 3 years ago the population was to be reduced because it would otherwise have nothing to eat; now the population does not even suffice to eat what America produces![11] That's what happens when you study so-called 'questions' one by one without linking them together. In so doing you naturally fall victim to that dialectic which 'is objectively present', Diihring notwithstanding, 'in things themselves'.[12]

I am delighted to hear that the Hohenzollern family again boasts a professing pederast. It would not bè complete without one. Admittedly Prince Karl, like Frederick William II, also 'operated' in that line, but he also included women. That reminds me, did Adolf Beust give you Mirabeau's *Secret History of the Court of Berlin*[13] which I gave him to pass on to you? If not, get hold of it. The book is inimitable on the subject of Frederick William II; the best bits have been dog's-eared.

Kindest regards.

Yours,

F. E.