---
id: MECW46-162
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 4, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "4 July 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Postcard, unsigned]

[Argenteuil,] 4 JULY 1882

DEAR FRED,

Summer did not actually begin until the 1ST of JULY (or RATHER THE SECOND ONLY). Up till now I've had 2 sulphur baths *with douches,* the 3rd will be tomorrow; never before have I encountered anything as magnificent as the shower-bath (alias douche); one climbs out of the bath on to a slightly raised board, and this *en nature*;[1] the bath attendant then manipulates the spray (about the size of a fire extinguisher) like a virtuoso his instrument, dictates the movements of the *corpus* and bombards all PARTS of that *corpus* in turn *[SAVE THE HEAD, (the cranium))* for 180 seconds (alias 3 MINUTES) now with greater, now with lesser force, even unto the legs and feet incl. in an ever mounting CRESCENDO.

As you will see, there is little inducement here for a man to write. I have to be at the RAILWAY by half past eight in the morning (i. e. THIS IS THE TIME OF LEAVING EXACTLY FOR Enghien), back to Argenteuil ABOUT 12 OCLOCK, *déjeuner*[2] shortly afterwards; *après*[3] a great need for rest, as this sulphur is tiring in whatever form; then out and about, etc. The air in the inhalation room is murky with sulphurous vapours; 30-40 MINUTES' spell here; every 5 minutes, at a special table, one inhales steam laden with specially pulverised sulphur (from one of the pipes (zinc) with stopcocks); each man encased in *caoutchouc*[4] from head to foot; after which they march in file round the table; innocent scene from Dante's inferno.

Regards to Schorlemmer. I still have a photograph of me for him, taken in Algiers.

Lafargue regards himself as a great oracle here. Paris is for him THE ONLY PLACE OF THE WORLD WORTH MANHOOD.

[On the side reserved for the address]

Fr. Engels

122 Regent's Park Road
London, N.W., Angleterre