---
id: MECW46-155
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, June 16, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "15 June 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Postcard] [Argenteuil,] 15 June 1882

DEAR FRED,

I thought I should be able to report progress over the past week or so. But the *temperature fell* as soon as I arrived, in fact *one day after my arrival.* The weather, therefore, according to what I've been told by Dr Dourlen, as also by his MEDICAL FRIEND[1] in Enghien, won't allow me to begin my sulphur treatment yet. In my former condition, during the happy time when I could smoke, I should have found the weather DELIGHTFUL. True, the sky is overcast more often than not, a bit of rain now and again, gusts of wind, not so much summer as late autumn, but nice weather for all that, if you're in good health!

Yesterday — as a result of a note to St Paul the Gascon^b — he came to visit me. I WAS GLAD TO SEE HIM. In compliance with my *avis'* he will keep silent — *until further orders* — about my presence here.

I go early to bed, get up late, spend a large part of the day with the children and Jennychen and take advantage of every favourable moment to go for a short stroll. All things considered I feel better than AT ANY TIME in Algiers, Monte Carlo or Cannes. It seems likely that the weather too will change for the better here. I shall write you a letter as soon as I've made my first trip to Enghien.

Best wishes to everyone.

Your

Moor

Tussychen has sent Jennychen an interesting eye-witness account of the Hyde Park meeting.

[On the side reserved for the address]

Fr. Engels

122 Regent's Park Road, London, N. W., *Angleterre*

[2]