---
id: MECW46-064
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 7, 1881"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "7 July 1881"
year: 1881
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN EASTBOURNE 1 6 0

[London,] 7 July 1881 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Moor,

In my last letter I quite forgot to mention money; owing to Schorlemmer's presence I have been somewhat restricted in my movements. You can now have £100 *à* £120, and it's simply a question of whether you want it all at one go and how much is to be sent there and how much is for here. When you get this letter, make up your mind *straight away* so that I get your answer by *tomorrow.* For Schorlemmer and Pumps are going to the theatre tomorrow evening, while I shall remain at home. I can then at once make out a CHEQUE in favour of Lenchen and take it to her. You or your wife can of course decide what is to be done with the money.

Tussy and Dolly Maitland acted very well; the girl showed a great deal of SELF POSSESSION and looked quite charming on the stage. Tussy was very good in the emotional scenes, though it was somewhat apparent that she had taken Ellen Terry for her model, as Radford had Irving, but she'll soon wean herself from that; if she really wants to make her mark in public she must unquestionably STRIKE OUT A LINE OF HER OWN, and she'll do that all right.

I hear that the sea air has not yet had the desired effect on your wife; that often happens in the early days; it may, and I trust will, come later.

Pumps is going to Manchester with Schorlemmer on Monday[1] to bring back little Lydia; I hear you have written to Tussy asking her to join you. I may perhaps come later when Pumps is back. We shall probably be going to Bridlington Quay ' 6 ' shortly and then to Jersey with Schorlemmer when he returns from Germany; at any rate that's what we've planned to date.

Best wishes from us all to your wife and yourself.

Your

F. E.