---
id: MECW46-091
title: "Letter to Johann Philipp Becker, November 4, 1881"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 November 1881"
year: 1881
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, *Vergessene Briefe (Briefe Friedrich Engels' an Johann Philipp Becker),* Berlin, 1920 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

[London,] 4 November 1881

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Old Man,

Your postcard re the congress^2 ' 5 arrived too late for me to write to you about it. Since then we have also had sundry calamities over here. Mrs Marx has been in bed for months, critically ill, and then Marx went down with bronchitis accompanied by all sorts of complications which, at his time of life and considering the general state of his health, was certainly no laughing matter. Fortunately the worst is over and, so far as Marx is concerned, all danger has been completely eliminated for the time being, though he has to spend the greater part of the day in bed and is greatly weakened.

Herewith money order for 4 pounds sterling = 100 frs 80 c. which is what I have to send you this time. I trust it will come in handy for, delighted though I am to hear that you have been able to make a start at earning a living, it is after all only a start and I'm only sorry that of late I myself have been somewhat short and therefore unable to step into the breach any sooner.

I'm always glad when a so-called international congress passes off, as it did on this occasion, without anyone making an ass of himself in public. You always get such a hotchpotch of people attending these affairs, some of whom have no other object than to look important in public and who for that very reason are capable of any stupidity. Well, this time it went off without any mishap.

Our people in Germany have given a splendid account of themselves at the elections. In 23 or 27 constituencies (I can't find out the exact number) they were in the second ballot, despite the fact that on this occasion all the other parties turned out to the very last man. And this under the stress of the exceptional law and state of siege, without a press, without meetings, without any means of public agitation and in the certain knowledge that by way of return the livelihood of some thousands within the party would again be sacrificed. It is altogether splendid and the impression it has made throughout Europe, and particularly here in England, has been quite tremendous. How many seats we get is neither here nor there. Enough anyway to say what is necessary in the Reichstag. But the fact that we have gained ground in the larger towns instead of losing it — that is first rate and here's three cheers for our lads in Germany!

Your old friend,

F.E.