---
id: MECW46-126
title: "Letter to Jenny Longuet, March 27, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "27 March 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published, in Russian, in the magazine *Nachalo,* No. 5, St Petersburg, 1889 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JENNY LONGUET

IN ARGENTEUIL

[Algiers,] Monday, 27 March 1882

My Dear Child,

I received your letter to-day (27 March); you know how delighted I am always to hear of you. My reports to you did not conceal the worst from you; so you may also feel quite sure that I *simply tell the truth* in announcing you that since the date of my last letter to you.)[1] my state of health is progressively improving. There is no longer insomny (the worst of all), nor want of appetite, nor any violent character of cough, the latter indeed much subdued. Of course the *vésicatoires*[2] can, because of their intense action, only once a week be renewed; so the process of the healing of the membranes (the essential tissue of the organ has not at all suffered) on the left side wants some time. Of course the most unsteady weather, with sudden changes, storms, heats, colds, rain, in fact only a few good intervals,— the steady *seasonable* air warm and *sec*[3] is still the great desideratum. When we just, like yesterday, had caught the decisive turning point — it was a beautiful day, and I had a promenade,— but to-day sky grey (with a *nuance noirâtre*[4], rain pouring down, wind howling. People here get it quite tired, for, it must not again and again be repeated: this such weather since December (inclus.) quite anormous in Algier. The thing was to inform oneself before starting on such a *chasse aux oies sauvages*[5] *Entre nous*:[6] Though in the Isle of Wight the weather was unfavourable, but still my health improved so greatly that people wondered when myself returning to London. But, then, I had *tranquillity* at Ventnor; at London, on the contrary, Engels' excitement (Lafargue, too, a quack, thought 'walking', free air etc. were all I did want) in fact has upset me: I felt, I could not longer stand it; hence my impatience to get from London away on any condition whatever! People may kill some one out of real most sincere love; with all that nothing more dangerous in such cases for a reconvalescent!

As I told you, dear child, I have had the good chance of having met with well-meaning, kind and unpretending people (French-Swiss and unmixed French, no German nor English in my Villa-Hôtel). Mr Maurice Casthelaz functions as volunteer under the orders of Dr Stephann; no Nym[7] more careful or attentive. Hence, my child, do not worry yourself as to my fancied helpless situation. Enough of male and female helps; and, on the other hand, it is the privilege of a 'patient' to be silent, to withdraw, etc., whenever I prefer the solitude or take no notice of the company.

Generally I have altogether neglected the French, English etc. daily press; I read only the telegraphic news. What I had desired, f. i., was Longuet's articles on the *grève*,[8] (Lafargue wrote me greatly praising those articles). As to Massard's *sottise*[9] I know to that moment nothing save what you have written me.

Write to Hirsch to send me his Adam-Contribution. What I would like, to get *durch Wünschenkappe*,![10] on a brilliant day here over Johnny; what would my little darling wonder at *Maures*[11] Arabs, Berbers, Turks, niggers, in one word this Babel and costumes (most of them poetic) of this oriental world, mixed with the 'civilised' French etc. and the dull Britons. Kiss also my sweet Harry, the noble Wolf, and the grand Pa[12]

And now farewell, my best child; also my compliments to Longuet.

Yours,

Old Nick

As to any working, is still out of the question; not even the correction of the *Capital* for a new edition.[13]