---
id: MECW46-160
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, June 24, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 June 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Postcard]

[Argenteuil,] 24 June 1882

DEAR FRED,

I got the REGISTERED LETTER yesterday; today I realised it in Paris. As a result of the present changeable weather I had an attack of muscular rheumatism in the region of my hips; as a result of this and other things a sleepless night from the 22nd to the 23rd on account of severe pain. No food the next day (though absolved my sulphur inhalation at Enghien yesterday); Dourlen called in the evening and helped by embrocating me with laudanum; ALL RIGHT now as regards this INCIDENT, except that slight twinges of muscular rheumatism still persist.

As regards Enghien the first question to be answered — for this depends upon the individual — is whether the local sulphur spring is strong enough. AT ALL EVENTS Reinhardt got rid of his bronchitis here, like Longuet before him. The latter was also at Cauterets *at an earlier time long before his marriage. Its height above the sea level 1200-1400 *mètres* about. I should be very glad if I should not want it for the bronchial catarrh; at all events Cauterets was out of the question for this time. Helen[1] will arrive at St Lazare *gare où** Longuet there to receive her.*

*Salut.*

Your

Moor

[On the side reserved for the address]

F. Engels. Esq.

122 Regent's Park Road,
London, N. W.