---
id: MECW46-215
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 4, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "4 December 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Ventnor,] 4 December 1882

DEAR FRED,

Herewith Bebel's letter[1] which I found most interesting. I do not believe an industrial crisis will supervene as soon as all that.

The weather in November was good on the whole, though very changeable. The first days of December alternated between bitter cold and a nasty, damp mugginess. Today it is fine, but I am never- theless condemned to remain in my room. In the last few days I have suffered from hoarseness (certainly not due to talking) and an un- pleasant sensation in my gullet; I have also been coughing more and not sleeping very well, despite my long, regular and constant walks. Hence I have again called in the doctor.[2] These gentlemen cannot be shaken off so easily! It is only a tracheal catarrh, but all the same he thought I ought to keep within doors until the inflammation has gone. Besides giving me some soothing medicine to take, he has ordered me to inhale vapour of benzoin (with something else added— seems to me something like chloroform). Today he again auscultated and percussed me — for the 3rd time since my arriv- al— and found that everything was otherwise in order. He will drop in again in a few days' time to see if I can be released from my confinement.

What is remarkable about the stuff in the *Plebe* concerning my theory of value is the rubbish talked by all 3, Laveleye, Cafiero and Candelari, in mutual opposition *l'un contre l'autre.*[3] In the quotation concerning my aforementioned theory of value which Candelari adduced from *Malon's Histoire critique de l'économie politique,* Malon's superficiality is such that it actually surpasses that of all 3 smatterers.

*Salut.*

Moor