---
id: MECW46-008
title: "Letter to August Bebel, after April 27, 1880"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "27 April 1880"
year: 1880
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN LEIPZIG

[London, after 27 April 1880]

[...][1] so as to make the whole thing impossible without actually prohibiting it.

Mr Hasselmann will soon become harmless if you people bring to light *really* compromising facts about him and take the wind out of his sails in the Reichstag, i. e. proceed in a frankly revolutionary way, which can be done by using quite temperate language, as you yourself did in exemplary fashion in your speech on the persecutions.[2] If, however, a person is constantly afraid of being thought by the philistine, as often happens, to be a bit more extreme than he really is, and if in fact the enclosed cutting from the *Kölnische Zeitung* is correct in reporting that the Social-Democrats have brought a motion intended to restore the *guild privilege* of trading in home-made goods, then the Hasselmanns and Mosts will have an easy task.

None of this, however, is really of much consequence. What is now keeping the party alive is unobtrusive, spontaneous activity on the part of individuals; like its organisation, it is kept going by their irrepressible journeyings. In Germany we have fortunately reached the stage when every action of our adversaries is advantageous to us; when all historical forces are playing into our hands, when nothing, absolutely nothing, can happen without our deriving advantage from it. For that reason we can quietly allow our adversaries to work for us. Bismarck is working for us like a real Trojan. He has now won Hamburg for us and will shortly also make us a present, first of Altona, and then of Bremen. The National Liberals are working for us, even though all they do is submit to kicks and vote taxes. The Catholics are working for us, even though they voted first against, and then *for,* the Anti-Socialist Law, in return for which they, too, have simply been delivered by Bismarck over to the tender mercies of the government, i. e. also placed outside the law. Anything we can do is a mere drop in the ocean compared with what events are doing for us at this moment. Bismarck's feverish activity, which is throwing everything into disorder and putting everything out of joint without achieving anything of a remotely positive nature; which is stretching the philistine's tax-paying potential to the utmost limit, and this for nothing and worse than nothing; which wants one thing one day and the opposite the next and is forcibly driving into the arms of the revolution the philistine who would so gladly grovel at his feet — this is our strongest ally, and I'm delighted at your being able to confirm from actual observation that there has in fact been a shift to the left, as was inevitable in the circumstances.

In France, too, things are progressing well. Our communist viewpoint is breaking new ground everywhere and the best of those advocating it are all of them former anarchists who have come over to us without our raising a finger.[3] Unanimity has thus been established among European socialists; any who are still shilly-shallying aren't worth mentioning now that the last remaining sect, the anarchists, has melted away. There, too, we find increasingly a general shift to the left among the bourgeois and peasants, as you have already remarked; but there's one snag here: this shift to the left is primarily tending towards *a war of retribution* and that must be avoided.

The victory of the Liberals here has at least *one* good aspect in that it puts a spoke in the wheel of Bismarck's foreign policy.[4] Since he might just as well dismiss the Russian war from his mind now, he will, as usual, doubtless sell his ally — Austria — to the first comer. After all, the bitter experiences of 1864-66 have already shown the Austrians that Bismarck seeks allies only to betray them — but they're too stupid and will again fall into the trap.

In Russia, too, everything is proceeding splendidly, despite judicial murder, banishments and an appearance of calm. You can't banish sheer lack of money. *Not one banker will make a loan* without a guarantee from the Imperial Assembly. Hence the present desperate recourse to an *internal* loan. *On paper* it will be a success, in reality a total failure. And then they will have to convene some assembly or other if only to obtain cash — always supposing something else doesn't happen in the meantime.

Kindest regards to you and Liebknecht from Marx and

Yours

F. E.