---
id: MECW46-129
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 4, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "4 April 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913. Printed according to the original. Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works,"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Algiers,] Tuesday, 4 April 1882

DEAR FRED,

Have received your postcard;[1] Laurachen's letter dated 29 March has also arrived.

My congratulations to Pumps.[2]

I'm progressing well on the whole but the weather is making an April fool of me.

[3][4]

*On 31 March,* Friday afternoon — a few hours before I DISPATCHED my letter to you[5] —Fermé called; he told me *inter alia* of a secret vouchsafed to him by an Algerian meteorologist, namely that next week the weather would *d'abord*'**[6] ***** be very wild for 3 days on account of the sirocco, after which there would be 3-4 wet days but finally a normal spring would step into the breach, booted and spurred. And anyone who doesn't believe it is mistaken.**

Meanwhile Saturday (1 April), as well as Monday (3 April), was *warm* (a bit 'too' *CLOSE)* but the wind (no sirocco yet) confined me to my balcony on account of the swirls of dust; by contrast, the morning of 2 April (Sunday) was so fine and inviting that I went for a 2 hours' stroll.

Last night a piping wind; rain at ABOUT 5 o'clock *this morning;* dry since 8 o'clock, sky overcast, continual squalls. Yesterday evening wonderful moonlight on the bay. I can never stop feasting my eyes on the sea in front of my balcony.

Give my best regards to Jollymeyer,[7] ditto the others.

Your

Moor

[On the side reserved for the address]

Fr. Engels

122 Regent's Park Road,

London, N. W. (Angleterre)