---
id: MECW46-019
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, September 3, 1880"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 September 1880"
year: 1880
publication: "First published in the language of the original (English) in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. I, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Collect"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN LONDON

[Bridlington Quay,] 3 September 1880

My dear Laura,

I have only a few minutes to reply to your amiable letter—we have been inspecting a geological amateur's collection this evening and to- morrow we are off to an excursion to Flamboro' Head. The weather here continues grand: regular Rhenish October weather, that is the acme of fine weather as far as I know, not a cloud on the sky, hot sun, cool bracing air at the same time. Why cannot you and Lafargue come for a week, the place is getting empty, plenty of apartments and accommodation of every sort.

I have not heard from Pumps since the letter I had at Ramsgate dated, I believe, 15th August. I wrote her at once, and since then, on arrival in London, last Friday[1] this day week, a postcard, but no re- ply. Now I am almost certain that she has written to Sarah or her mother Mrs Nicholls who stays in our house during my absence.

Would it be too much trouble for you to call there and inform me of the result of your inquiries as I am getting rather anxious and as I am sure there is some misunderstanding abroad by which I am kept without news?

It is now half past nine at night, all windows wide open and yet the fine cool air outside will not come in rapidly enough to enable me to keep my coat on. The beer — oh the beer, it would be worth your while to come here only in order to drink one glass of beer at the Pier refreshment rooms, a nice little café — such splendid beer!

Moore and Beust are off to the 'Parade' (such a thing you know is *de rigueur* at every seaside place) to hear the music and hunt *backfishes,* of which there are excellent specimens here; you know the *backfish*[2]

lives on dry land. At all events before leaving they wished to be kindly remembered to both of you.[3]

Yours affectionately

F. Engels