---
id: MECW46-178
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 4, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "4 September 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46, printed according to the original"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN LONDON

[Postcard, unsigned]

Vevey, 4 September 1882

Hôtel du Léman

DEAR FRED,

Laura will be writing to you at length about events, or rather the uneventfulness here, since we are living in the Land of Cockaigne.[1]

Like others, we have been for TRIPS on the LAKE.

On 3 1ST August I got Jennychen's letter enclosing your letter[2]

and the CHEQJJE which last I handed in at the local bank of Genton et Co. for *encaissement*[3] in Paris.

On 31 August, 1ST, 2ND and 3RD SEPTEMBER marvellous weather (too hot yesterday). Today wet and stormy; hope it won't degenerate into general rain. Odd that I should still be coughing; I think I'm the only person in Vevey who coughs; at all events I haven't met anyone else who does. My GENERAL STATE, however, is most satisfactory; with Laura I climbed not only to the top of the local vineyard, but also to the top of the much higher vineyard at Montreux, without feeling the slight- est discomfort.

I was called on at our hotel by a M R Songeon, *président du conseil mu- nicipal de Paris*;[4] is one of the *réfugiés*;[5] whom I knew in London in 1849-1850. He presented me with the official report made to the *conseil municipal* of Paris by the deputation (amongst whom Mr Songeon) it had sent to Rome for Garibaldi's apotheosis[6] the thing is mainly concerned with 'Songeon's' own apotheosis, since he always acted as spokesman for the other French delegates. Also showed me a copy of *Capital* which is to accompany him to the sylvan retreat not far removed from here, whither he was wending his way.

So far the English haven't made such rapid progress in Egypt 5 5 as Wolseley 'prognosticated'.

Mr Virchow, or so I see from the *supplément* to yesterday's *Journal de Genève,* has again demonstrated that he is far and away above

Darwin, he alone, in fact, being scientific and hence also 'contemp- tuous' of organic chemistry.

[On the side reserved for the address]

Fr. Engels,, Esq.

122 Regent's Park Road,

*London,* N. W., *Angleterre*