---
id: MECW46-225
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, December 16, 1882"
volume: 46
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 December 1882"
year: 1882
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Book I, Moscow, 1924 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 46"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 16 December 1882

Dear Mr Bernstein,

Schorlemmer complains that he has not received the *Sozialdemo- krat* for some little while; his subscription expired and he sent me the encl. CHEQUE (which I forgot about) no less than a month ago with the request that his *annual* subscription be renewed and 'the balance be used for party purposes'.

The ms. of the Mark has had to be completely rewritten 3 times; on top ofthat I again had to go through about 5 or 6 of Maurer's 10 fat volumes,[1] besides which there were other sources to compare. I have now sent it to Marx who has slogged away at the subject much more thoroughly and for much longer than I have 4 7 5; I expect it back on Monday.

Malon *se moque de*[2] Vollmar. Otherwise he would certainly have corrected the latter's howler to the effect that the 'Alliancists' at- tacked by the *Egalité* were understood in the sense of the Bakuninist Alliance.[3] Far from it. The Possibilists were thus described because they are now wholly indistinguishable from the people in the Alliance socialiste 4 7 6 which was founded some 4 years ago by Jourde, the ex- Communard for finance, with the help of past and present Proudhon- ists (e.g. Longuet) and which constitutes *La Justice's* socialist re- serve. You must certainly have seen this Alliance mentioned in con- nection with elections; it put up candidates for the recent general election to the Chamber and obtained nearly as many votes — in some *arrondissements* at any rate — as the Parti ouvrier.[4] If Vollmar knew nothing of this, despite his year and a half in Paris, it was because Malon deliberately kept it from him like much else. That's what happens when you give a gang your uncritical sup- port.

I have to chuckle when Vollmar praises Malon as the party disci- plinarian and accuses the others of a breach of discipline.[5]

Who, I ask, is guilty of indiscipline — he who carries the old flag high or he who recruits people with the express aim of deserting the colours and exchanging the old flag for a new one? Where, I ask, would Malon have got his majority at St-Etienne from[6] if he hadn't first recruited people whose intention from the start, and this was precisely why they had been recruited, was to subvert the old programme?

That was a choice row between Malon and his Clovis Hugues over Louis Blanc. And they call themselves a party!

You will have seen that the Fédération du Nord 4 5 4 has declared outright for Roanne.

Some of Lafargue's articles in the more recent issues of the *Egalité* have been truly delightful, e.g. on Bontoux's candidature.[7]

Witticisms are better suited to them than doctrinaire pontifica- tions.

Would you please be good enough to see that the issues are sent on to Schorlemmer.

Yours very sincerely,

F. E.