---
id: MECW48-209
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, August 17, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "17 August 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906, and, in full"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN MOUNT DESERT

Eastbourne, 17 August 1889

4, Cavendish Place

Dear Sorge,

Letters of 1 August received.[1] So we are both taking a summer holi- day—a summer of which the main feature over here is plenty of nice fresh rain.

I can't send any papers, since these are forwarded to me only at very irregular intervals from London. Just the *Labour Elector,* a paper which is now assuming some importance. It was started by Champion in oppo- sition to Hyndman, but kept afloat with suspect funds (from a Liberal- Unionist quarter)[2], and hence was egregiously pro-Tory and inanely anti-Irish, so that one had to be very wary of it; but because it was suspect and already so notoriously Tory-Socialist[3] people stopped buying the thing. This, however, brought about a revolution. The Tory funds would seem to have run out and thus Champion—*au fond*[4] a no less unreliable bloke than Hyndman—found himself forced to do some- thing he had long resisted, namely accept the terms offered by a commit- tee—Burns, Bateman (typographer), Mann (engineer), Cunninghame- Graham—whereby the said committee became proprietor of the paper and Champion its temporary editor. The names of the committee members are a guarantee that all association with other parties and their funds has been broken off, and the paper, which is clearly on the up and up, is said to be almost paying its way. The Tory and anti-Irish nonsense has ceased, while the paper has done us yeoman service in the matter of the congress.[5]

The plan of Hyndman and Co's gang was to cast doubt on the creden- tials—which they alleged to be false—of the Marxist congress. Hence their unacceptable terms for fusion. The same old Bakuninist tactics as of yore, but specially adapted for English consumption. That it wouldn't be much of a catch on the Continent was plain, but all one to them; provided it caught on here in England, their position would, for a time, be secure—and here all the odds were in their favour. But our vigorous offensive brought the business to an abrupt conclusion—Burns' article[6] and mine[7] (on the Austrian credentials) in the *Labour Elector* have, I think, robbed them of all desire to cast doubt on other people's credentials, an activity in which the Possibilists themselves have recently indulged to such good purpose as to leave small scope for anyone else.

There is now some prospect that a viable socialist organisation may be formed here which will gradually undermine the Social Democratic Federation[8] or else absorb it. Nothing can be done with the League;[9]

they're just a bunch of anarchists and Morris is their lay figure. The idea is to agitate for an eight hour day among the democratic and radical clubs,[10] —our recruiting grounds here—and the Trades Unions, and to organise the May the First 1890 demonstration. Since the latter was decided upon at *our* congress, the Social Democratic Federation must either adhere to it—i.e. submit to *our* resolutions—or oppose it and thus commit suicide. As you can see from the *Labour Elector,* the movement is at last taking hold amongst the Trades Unions[11] and the star of Broadhurst, Shipton and Co. would seem to be rapidly on the wane. By next spring we shall, I believe, have made considerable progress.

Russian jiggery-pokery continues amain. First the Armenian atroci- ties, followed by others on the Serbian border. Next, for the benefit of the Serbs, magic lantern slides of the Greater Serbian Empire, and hints about the necessity of a Serbian military convention with Russia. And now the Cretan fracas which began, strangely enough, with internecine carnage among the Cretan Christians, until the Russian consul contrived to get them to sink their differences and massacre the Turks. And the stupid Turkish government goes and sends Shakir Pasha to Crete, a man who spent 8 years as Turkish ambassador to Petersburg and, while there, was bought by the Russians! The whole of this Cretan affair was intended, amongst other things, to prevent the British concluding an alliance with the Prussians.[12] That is why it was launched when William came over here[13] —so that Gladstone could return to his hobby of philhellenism and the liberals wax enthusiastic about the Cretan sheep stealers. Little Willie wanted to be 'one up' on the Russians, wangle Crete for the Greeks as a dowry for his sister[14] and, by the magic of his presence, induce the Sultan[15] to abdicate. But once again the Russians have shown him that, by comparison with them, he is but a babe in arms. If Greece gets Crete, it will be by the grace of *Russia.*

Thanks for the news about Hartmann. I'd very much like to have further details as I want to put paid to this Prussian pack of lies in the *Evening News.*

It's very sensible of your son[16] to want to find a post. I only wish my Rosher nephew[17] could also be persuaded to do so. These young gentle- men imagine the whole world's made of money and that we old folk are simply too stupid to pick the stuff up. By the time they have learnt how things really are it will have cost a fortune.

Warm regards to you and your wife. Schorlemmer left here on Wednesday for Germany.

Your

F.E.