---
id: MECW48-028
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, April 26, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "26 April 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance, t. II, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

London, 26 April 1887

My dear Laura,

My congratulations to Paul *le candidat du Jardin des Plantes—et des animaux*. Being, in his quality as a nigger, a degree nearer to the rest of the animal kingdom than the rest of us, he is undoubtedly the most appropriate representative of that district.[1] Let us hope the *animaux*[2] will have the best of it in this struggle against the *bêtes*.[3] I am rather surprised at Baslu's holding back, but if a set of men succeeds in being excluded from the press altogether,[4] what can they expect? Fom Mesa's letter in the Spanish *Socialista* I see that the Blanquists too are making volte-face and approaching the Possibilists[5] —another bad sign. A little success—even relative—at the elections would therefore be very welcome when our people are under such a momentary cloud. I know very well that that cloud will pass, that Parisian party life is a continual change of ups and downs, but at the same time I cannot but wish that next time they will cherish their own little weekly paper a little more than those disreputable dailies to which they work hard to give a reputation in order to be kicked out as soon as they have succeeded.

That Stanton of yours seems to be an out-and-out Yankee. But the cutest Yankee in Europe is as often and as much out of his element as the toughest Polish Jew. They misjudge the people they have to deal with.[6] The New York Executive have launched in their despair another circular against Aveling saying that his statements are lies, yet making very important admissions in our favour.[7] We shall of course reply. But the affair is practically ended, the Executive are themselves accused in New York as swindlers and liars in another affair and on their trial before the New York sections; so that whatever they have said, say, or may say, loses all importance. In the meantime the *Aufsichtsbehörde*[8] of the American party appeals to them (to Edward and Tussy) to let the matter drop, and from very many places they receive very nice letters both from Americans and Germans. So that matter is virtually settled. Edward and Tussy's agitation in the East End clubs is going on very favourably. The American example has its effects; it at last offers a handle to stir up the English working people.[9]

In the League[10] the Anarchists are on the decline, as everywhere when they are seriously handled instead of being trifled with. Their last proposal yesterday in the Council was, that at the Conference of Delegates[11] all *vérification des mandats* should be suppressed and anybody accepted who said he was a delegate—to allow them to manufacture their usual bogus votes. This however was too much even for Morris; yet a minority of five was found to vote for such nonsense!

The Pagny affair[12] is not quite clear to me yet. The gist of the matter lies in Art. 4, No. 1, of the German Penal Code:

*'Pourra être poursuivi selon les lois pénales de l'empire allemand:*

*1) un étranger qui aura commis, à l'étranger {en pays étranger) un acte de haute trahison contre l'empire allemand ou contre un des états fédérés, ou qui aura fait de la fausse monnaie.'*[13]

To apply this article to anybody but a political refugee not naturalised abroad, must produce a collision with the country of the man prosecuted. No nation in its senses will stand such treatment and if they tried it upon an Englishman, the most peaceable minister would be compelled to send at once the British fleet to the German coast. Therefore this looks as if Bismarck wanted to place France between war or humiliation. For that he was ignorant of the warrant against Schnaebelé is impossible. And yet the state of Europe is such that a war would be, for Bismarck, to play va banque. The man must be completely mad to act thus.

Perhaps a few days more will give a clue. I really cannot imagine him to be such a consummate ass.

Enclosed the cheque Paul writes for £12.

Nim is well—was at the theatre last night with Pumps—going again this week to the Princess's—with Edward's ticket. Beer is flowing plentiful—I consume fully 2 bottles a day and march three miles, and for the last few Sundays have taken a glass of Port—*voila, du progrès!*[14]

*Bien à vous, je vous embrasse*