---
id: MECW48-087
title: "Letter to Hermann Schluter, January 10, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 January 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collecte"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER[1]

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 10 January 1888

Dear Mr Schlüter,

I have no objection to Ede's printing the final part of the introduction to the *Blood-and-Thunder Patriots.*[2]

Kindly tell me when, approximately, you will be able to start printing the *Theory of Force.* For I am working on a fourth chapter to it in which I examine Bismarck's use of force and the reasons for its momentary success. I am writing it now, but shall have to revise it immediately before printing and make additions in accordance with the latest facts. Naturally I shall be happy to place this chapter too at Ede's disposal, once everything has got to that stage.[3]

I shall shortly be putting my books in order and it may be that another copy of the *Holy Family* will turn up; if so, the archives[4] shall have it. Meanwhile please continue to keep an eye open for the *Revue der Neue Rheinischen Zeitung*—isolated articles would be of use only in cases of direct necessity.[5]

Bruhn's distorted account is mentioned in *Herr Vogt,* p. 124. Note— Bangya, having represented himself as the agent of a chap called Eisenmann, or some such name, who was supposedly setting up as a bookseller in Berlin, had promised that the latter would print the ms.[6]

This was by Marx and myself and the original is here in my house. However, the actual purchaser of the copy was Stieber, who was silly enough to imagine that the Prussian police would find in a ms. *intended by us for publication* secret revelations and not merely a derisive portrayal of the great men of the emigration, for there was, of course, nothing more to it than that. We were done out of its *publication,* but the people who were really done were the Prussian police, who no doubt also took care never to boast about it and, along with them, Mr Kossuth who, until this episode, had been unaware of the unsavoury nature of his protégé, though subsequently he still sought to support him.

Your kind wishes for the New Year are heartily reciprocated.

Ever yours,

F. E.