---
id: MECW48-230
title: "Letter to J. H. Johnson, J. Johnson and G. B. Ellis, November 15, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "15 November 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO J. H. JOHNSON, J. JOHNSON AND G. B. ELLIS

IN LONDON

[London, 15 November 1889] [Draft]

Dear Sirs,

I have received and considered your letter of the 7th inst.[1] It strikes me as rather peculiar that you expect me to treat your enquiries as 'confi- dential', but never offer to extend the same treatment to my reply. Of course I cannot undertake such one-sided engagements.

If I understand you rightly, I am to report to you and eventually name the author of any reports I may have heard on board, from passengers, officers, or sailors, as far as they may have been disrespectful towards the circulating pumps of the *City of New York.* Such communications, if any, could only be made to me in the expectation that I would treat them after the manner of gentlemen, and not bring their authors into difficul- ties even supposed they had used an unguarded word or two. To act otherwise, would in my opinion be to turn common informer. Unless I misinterpret what seems to me the clear meaning of your proposal, that is what it amounts to; and in that case it is of a *naivete* equalled only by its refreshing coolness.

Anyhow, to set your minds at rest, I will tell you that I don't recol- lect that anybody in my presence, cast the slightest slur upon the immac- ulate circulating pumps which you have the honour to represent and that I neither know nor care who made them.

I will not condescend to ask you to treat this letter as confidential. A perusal of this correspondence by a Continental or American lawyer or man of business might lead to some valuable hints as to the manner of conducting similar enquiries.