---
id: MECW48-188
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, May 14, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "14 May 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. 2 (1887-1890), Paris, Ed. sociales, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in En"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 14 May 1889

My dear Laura,

Could not your people in Paris, now that things are mending and going on swimmingly, look with a little less morosity upon what we are trying to do in order to help them? Nobody has asked them to enter into polemics with the *Star,* nor write long refutations. But supposing Vaillant wrote to the *Star:* 'In your No.- you assert, on the strength of Possibilist assertions made to you, that I... (did so and so, *Star,* May 7th).[1] I have not the time nor you the space to refute in detail such rubbish. I merely ask you to allow me to state, in your next issue, that this is an infamous calumny' (or something of the sort).

And supposing the Treasurer, Chairman, or Secretary of Boulé's Committee[2] wrote: 'In your issue etc. you say that Boulé's election was supported by Boulangist money. As Chairman (or whatever he was) of Boulé's Committee, I know where the very small amount of money we could dispose of, has come from—all from working men's subscriptions. I therefore declare the above assertion which was made to you by Possibilists, to be an infamous lie' etc.

And so a few more by different people. That would strengthen our hands with the *Star* very much.

Especially at this moment. This morning's *Star* has *Paul's* invitation,[3] —I am afraid, put in in order to give him[4] an excuse not to put in the official Convocation with *all the signatures.* Still, Bernstein shall try him again with that (copy enclosed) in a day or two. And Edward and Bonnier saw him this morning, when he promised to put in a letter of Bonnier's tomorrow[5] and asked Bonnier to dinner for next Monday when Bonnier must try and work him. You see the iron is still a little hot and may be welded if only we could be supported by a few blows from Paris. If we do not strike now, it will be too late soon.

You say the Paris Committee[6] will work by its numerous proclamations and that is better than letters to the Editor. Most certainly; but the letters to the Editor are wanted exactly for the purpose of getting him *to insert the proclamations when they come.* What use will be all the proclamations here when we cannot get them into any paper except the *Labour Elector,* which does perhaps more harm than good if it is the *only* paper to notice them?

As part of the conversation with Massingham was carried on in English, not understood by Bonnier, I do not yet know all that happened. Anyhow I hope you will see that our plan of campaign—to maintain the position we had from the beginning and to keep the *Star* open for communications from our side—was the only one possible, and not quite so absurd as our Paris friends seem to think. We *know* that at the *Star* office great weight is laid upon such bombardments with letters from the outside public, and in this case it is the more important as you know yourself that Possibilists, Smith Headingly and Hyndman *all'unisono* shout into Massingham's ears that the whole affair is a personal affair of the Marx family and nothing else.

I have written to Bebel[7] to write to Danes and Austrians to hurry on with their signatures, and through the Danes, work on the Swedes and Norwegians, and also I have consoled him about his fear of not getting lodgings and meals in Paris at the impending festive time. Bebel never having seen anything bigger than Berlin (for here he was only a few days and under good protection) is a little *kleinstädtisch[8] * in these matters. The sooner the circular with *all* the signatures appears, the better; that will tell best with people here.

I am sure your people in Paris have every reason to be content. They have got what they wanted, and there is plenty of time left for everything. Why then should they be so anxious to take revenge on friend and foe alike, look glum at every proposal made to them, try to find out difficulties where there are none and grumble like John Bulls? Surely *tout le gaîté française ne s'est pas évanouie[9] *—let them become French again, the road to victory is open before them; it is we here that have suffered defeat but this is not the decisive position and as you see we keep fighting on as well as we can.

Ever yours

F.E.