---
id: MECW48-153
title: "Letter to August Bebel, January 5, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 January 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 5 January 1889

Dear Bebel,

First of all let me heartily reciprocate your kind New Year's wishes. Today, fog permitting, I must write to you by request concerning two delicate matters. Both have to do with the fear that Liebknecht might commit the party to a not altogether desirable course when, as has been announced, he visits London and Paris[1] (if he comes *on his own,* that is), nor, in view of his dependence on passing moods (which again is often due to self-deception), can I altogether disagree with the chaps.

In Paris it is a question of the congress or rather two congresses—the Possibilists' and our own, in other words the international congress decided upon at the Trades Unions Congress in Bordeaux in November[2]

and again at the Socialist Congress in Troyes.[3] Lafargue is afraid that Liebknecht has had dealings with the Possibilists and that you might perhaps send delegates to *their* congress. I have written and told Lafargue[4] that in my view you cannot possibly do this. The Possibilists, having joined

in mortal combat with our people, the so-called Marxists, have now set themselves up as the one true church which absolutely prohibits any intercourse, any cooperation with the others—Marxists no less than Blanquists—and have formed an alliance with the one true church over here (the Social Democratic Federation;)[5], an alliance not the least of whose aims is to oppose the German Party everywhere so long as it refuses to join this unsavoury league and cease associating with other Frenchmen and Englishmen. Moreover, the Possibilists have sold themselves to the present government, their fares, congress expenses and periodicals are paid for out of secret funds, and all this on the pretext of combating Boulanger and defending the republic, hence also France's Opportunist exploiters, the Ferrys, etc., their present allies.[6] And they defend the present Radical government which, in order to remain in office, must do all the Opportunists' dirty work for them, a government which ordered an assault on the people on the occasion of Eudes' funeral[7] and in Bordeaux and Troyes, just as in Paris, is more rabid in its opposition to the red flag than any government before it. To go along with this gang would be a denial of your entire foreign policy to date. Two years ago in Paris the same lot made common cause with the venal English trades unions against the socialist demands[8] and if they took a different stand over here in November,[9] it was because they had no alternative. Moreover, it is only in Paris that they are strong; in the provinces they're a negligible quantity, proof of this being that they cannot hold a congress in Paris because the provinces would either stay away or prove hostile. Nor are they able to hold one in the provinces. Two years ago they went to a little place tucked away in the Ardennes[10] this year they expected to find accommodation in Troyes, where several of the labour town councillors, having betrayed their class after the election, had joined them. But they were not re-elected and the *comité*—their own *comité*—extended an invitation to *all* French Socialists. Thereupon, dismay in the Paris camp; an attempt to rescind this—in vain. And so they didn't go to their own congress, which was taken over and brilliantly run by our Marxists. What the provincial trades unions think of them can be seen from the enclosed resolution passed at the Bordeaux Trades Unions Congress in November. On the Paris Municipal Council they have 9 men, whose main purpose it is to oppose, on no matter what pretext, Vaillant's socialist activities, to betray the workers and in return to secure not only grants of money for themselves and their supporters but also sole control of the labour exchanges.

The Marxists, who control the provinces, are the *only* anti-chauvinist party in France; the stand they have taken on behalf of the German labour movement has made them unpopular in Paris, and to send delegates to a congress there that is hostile to these people would be to cut off your nose to spite your own face. They also know how best to combat Boulanger,[11] who stands for the general feeling of dissatisfaction in France. When Boulanger wanted to hold a banquet in Montluçon, our people took 300 tickets so as to put to him through Dormoy—a most able little chap—some highly categorical questions about his attitude to the labour movement, etc. When the worthy general learned of this, he cancelled the whole banquet.

The fog precludes any further writing today. More in a day or two.

Your

F. E.