---
id: MECW48-195
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, May 27, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "27 May 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 27 May 1889

My dear Lafargue,

By the same post I am sending you the report on the *Alliance*[1] Would you also like to have the *Fictitious Splits*?[2] Send me the article for the Russian review,[3] and I'll send it on to Danielson.

Since Lavrov has turned coy,[4] write to N. Axelrod, Képhir-Anstalt, Hirschengraben, Zurich and ask him to get you, besides his own, the signatures of Vera Zasulich (since you haven't got her address), and those of G. Plekhanov and other Russian Marxists. That will astound our worthy eclectic.

The English Convocation[5] is already at the printers; tomorrow I shall have the proofs, and distribution will begin the day after.

Parnell has refused his signature as a private person, but has given it in his capacity as the *HONORARY SECRETARY* of the *LABOUR ELECTORAL ASSOCIATION.*

Since you must have received this signature, together with those of its other members (Champion, Mann, Bateman), I did not telegraph you, for you would, of course, take the signatures as sent to you direct, and not from my letter.

The reason is that he is being sent by his *TRADES UNION* (cabinet makers) to the Possibilist congress, where he and Burns will support our line. If the Possibilists oppose their proposal for a merger, they might even part company with them and join us. But that is, as yet, the music of the future.[6]

If I seemed insistent, it was because of the contradictory information that was coming in from Paris, and because I didn't know whether or not agreement had been reached as to the text of the Convocation. But now things will get going over here as well.—It will be a thunderbolt.

Your tactics are best, more especially since you haven't got a paper and since everyone in France has already taken sides. Here, where not a few are still sitting on the fence and where, in addition, we must try and shake the faith of those who have already gone over to the enemy—and it can be done—we must go into the attack.

Tomorrow I shall at least, I hope, be able to put in a little anti-Hyndman work;[7] today, all my time has been taken up with arrangements for the English Convocation and with running errands.

The letter from Lyons was in the enclosed envelope. I sent it to you so that you might decipher the name and address of the signatory for me.[8] It contained a request for copies of my writings. However, you appear to have received my accompanying letter asking you to enlighten me on the above.

Yours ever,

In haste F. E.

Farjat must let us have a definite yea or nay—perhaps he had left before the vote was taken?[9]