---
id: MECW48-052
title: "Letter to John Lincoln Mahon, July 26, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "26 July 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Reproduced from the original Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JOHN LINCOLN MAHON[1]

IN LONDON

Eastbourne, 26 July 1887

4 Cavendish Place

Dear Mr Mahon,

Your postcard with address was forwarded to me here, hence the delay.

If your letter means anything, it means that you intend, as far as you can, to shove Aveling entirely out of the movement.[2] If you decline to work along with Aveling on *public* grounds, you are bound to come out with them, so as either to enable Aveling to clear himself or to free the movement from a dangerous and false co-operator. If not, then you are bound, in my opinion, to set aside your personal feelings in the interest of the movement.

Of all the various Socialist groups in England, what is now the 'oppo- sition' in the League,[3] was the only one with which so far I could thor- oughly sympathise. But if that group is allowed to fall to pieces from mere personal whims and squabbles, or from mutual suspicions and insinuations which are carefully kept away from the light of day, it can only dissolve into a number of small cliques held together by personal motives, and utterly unfit to take any sort of lead in a really national movement. And I do not see on what grounds I should sympathise with

any of these cliques more than with another, or with the Social Democratic Federation[4] or any other body.

I have no right to ask you why you refuse to co-operate with Aveling. But as you have worked with him for years,[5] *he* has, and therefore I consider myself bound to communicate your letter to him.

Yours sincerely

F. Engels