---
id: MECW48-220
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, October 8, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "8 October 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "A brief excerpt from this letter was first published in French by the journal *La Pensée*, No. 61, 1955. First published in full, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Laf"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

London, 8 October 1889

My dear Laura,

What a melancholy set our French friends are! Because Paul and Guesde have not succeeded, they seem to despair of everything and Paul thinks the less said about these elections, the better! Why, I consider the result of the elections not a *déroute*)[1] but a relative success worth registering both in England and Germany. At the first ballots we had between 60 and 80,000 votes, which is quite enough to show that we are nearly twice as strong as the Possibilists, and while they got but two men[2] (of whom one moribund[3] elected, we have Baudin, Thivrier, Lachize, and then Cluseret and Ferroul who are bound to cast in their lot with the first three; that makes five to two, and will be sufficient, with proper management, to put the two Possibilists in a very impossible position. But both in England and Germany, the effect will be made, not by the number of seats secured but by the number of *votes given.* So let me ask you to see to it that we get, as soon as possible, say *not later* than Monday morning next, but if possible before, the list of votes cast for our candidates at 1st and 2nd ballots, for the *Labour Elector* and the *Sozialdemokrat.* Surely Paul will not push the *droit à la paresse*[4] far enough to refuse us that little bit of work.

Of course Guesde's defeat is a misfortune, but then while I thought it necessary to do everything to prevent it, I never believed much in his success, after the 1,445 votes *au premier tour!*)[5] What cannot be helped we must put up with. It is a far greater advantage for us to have got rid of Boulanger. Boulanger in France and the Irish question in England are the two great obstacles in our way, the two side-issues which prevent the formation of an independent working men's party. Now Boulanger is smashed up, the road is cleared in France. And at the same time, the monarchist attack on the Republic has failed. That means the gradual passage of monarchism from the ground of practical to that of sentimental, politics, the transfer of Monarchists to Opportunism,[6] the formation of a new Conservative party out of both, and the struggle of that Conservative-Bourgeois-party with the *petits bourgeois* and peasants (Radicals[7] and the working class; a struggle in which the working-class Socialists will soon get the upper hand of the Radicals, especially after the way they have discredited themselves. I do not expect that everything will pass off in this simple, classical form, but the innate logic of French development is sure to overcome all side-issues and obstacles, especially as both forms of antiquated (not simply bourgeois) reaction—Boulangism and monarchism—have been so well beaten. And all we can ask for is that all these side-issues be removed and that the field be clear for the struggle of the three great sections of the French society: *bourgeois, petits bourgeois et paysans, ouvriers*[8] And that I think we shall get.

Then Ferry is got rid of and I think Mother Crawford is right when she considers him an obstacle to even his own party.[9] Colonial adventures will no longer bar the way; nor will the formation of the new bourgeois party be trammelled by the necessity of respecting the traditions of Ferryism.

Thus I do not despair at all, on the contrary; I see a distinct advance in the result of the elections, *eine sehr bestimmte Klärung der Lage*[10] Of course you will get Conservative government to begin with; but not what you had, the government of a *distinct set* of the bourgeoisie only. The Opportunists were as much a mere section of the French bourgeoisie as were the *satisfaits*[11] of Louis-Philippe and Guizot: these were the *haute finance,*[12] the others are the set which strives to become the *haute finance.* Now, for the first time, you will get a real government of the *entire* bourgeoisie. In 1849-51, the Rue de Poitiers[13] under Thiers, too, formed a government of the whole bourgeois class, but that was by the truce between the two opposing monarchical parties, and by its very nature *passager.*[14] Now you will get one based upon the despair to upset the republic, upon its recognition as an unavoidable *pis-aller* and therefore a bourgeois government which has the stuff to last until its final smash-up.

It was the splitting-up of the French bourgeoisie into so many sections, fractions and factions which has so often deceived the people. You upset one section, say the *haute finance,* and thought you had upset the whole bourgeoisie; but you merely brought into power another section. There are 1/ the legitimist or generally monarchist landed proprietors, 2/ the old *haute finance* of Louis-Philippe's time, 3/ the second set of *haute finance* of the Second Empire, 4/ the Opportunists[15] who to a great extent have still their fortunes to make, 5/ the industrial and commercial bourgeoisie chiefly of the provinces, who are generally hangers-on, practically, to whatever section happens to be in power, being themselves scattered and without their common centre. Now these all will now have to unite as 'Moderates' and 'Conservatives', will have to drop their old shibboleths and party-cries which divided them, and for the first time act as a bourgeoisie *une et indivisible*[16] And this *concentration bourgeoise* will be the real meaning of all the *concentrations républicaines et autres*[17] so much talked about of late, and it will be a great progress, leading gradually to a scattering of Radicals and a real concentration of Socialists.

Ouf! Now that's enough on this blessed subject. Tonight I expect Longuet here and shall cull wisdom from his lips. I am sorry he is beaten as it was a very important personal issue with him.

Of Sam Moore no news since he passed Sierra Leone. Tussy has tried to see his brother, but cannot find him at home. So we don't know whether his family have heard of him.

Nim has raved all the summer about your garden and the vegetables and fruit therein, and I have her special orders to say that she anxiously awaits what she calls her share of the pears, grapes and other good things now about due.

Will you give Paul the enclosed cheque for £20.

Ever your old

F. Engels