---
id: MECW48-258
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, March 14, 1890"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "14 March 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "First published in English in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. Il, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 14 March[1] 1890

My dear Laura,

Last night Bernstein called. We think it best you should write to Bebel asking him for some information. He has the *Parliamentsalmanach* which we have not and a Secretary who might copy out a few extracts. You might say Bernstein and I had suggested this to you.

If you like you might write also direct to Carl Grillenberger, Weizenstrasse 14, Nürnberg G. von Vollmar, Schwabing bei München, J. H. W Dietz, Furthbachstrasse 12, Stuttgart,

F. Kunert, Red. Der 'Breslauer Nachrichten', Breslau[2] and ask them

for personal details which no doubt they would be glad to give you. Other addresses we have not got.

I will ask Tussy about that niece of Mohr's Paul has written about. I have not heard anything about her. Would be curious if you should turn out to be connected with little Abraham, vulgo Alexander, Weill!

Things are getting serious in Germany. The *Kreuz-Zeitung,* ultra- conservative, declares the Socialist law useless and bad! Well, we shall probably get rid of it, but Puttkamer's word will then become true: we shall have the major state of siège instead of the minor one, and cannons instead of expulsions.![3] Things go so well for us, we never dared to hope half so much, but, but, it will be stirring times and everything depends upon our men not allowing themselves to be provoked into riots. In three years we may have the agricultural labourer, the mainstay of Prussia, and *then*—feu[4]

Ever yours

F. E.

We went to-day up to Highgate. Tussy had been already in the morn- ing, planted Mohr's and your Mama's grave with crocus, primroses, hyacinths, etc. very beautifully. If Mohr had lived to see this!