---
id: MECW48-011
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, February 16, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 February 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 16 February 1887

My dear Lafargue,

My congratulations to our friends on the occasion of the *Vote's* resus- citation;[1] let us hope that this time its way[2] will be a triumphal one. Such of the *Cri* as Laura has sent me to look at is deadly dull; not even Bismarck's German reptiles[3] are as capable of sending us to sleep on our feet. Let us hope that the Parisians will refuse to stomach such LEADERS, even when spiced with gossip column and feuilletonist sauce.

I have read Laura's letter about Lavrov to Tussy; she will attend to the matter, although her hands are very full just now.[4] To begin with Aveling has been suffering from QUINSY (which he himself instantly diagnosed as diphtheria) and, as a patient, he is as intractable as Pumps. Furthermore, she has had no sleep for three or four nights and has had to concern herself with the affairs of him, Edward (a Roumanian construction into which my pen has lapsed thanks to my present preoc- cupation with that language), so that she has not had time to run errands in connexion with Lavrov's books. And, on top of that, something else has happened. First, I got a long letter from *la* Wischnewetzky,[5] from which I gather that the idiots on the Executive Committee of the Socialist Labor Party intend to bring an action of some sort against Aveling, whom they accuse of having tried to defraud the Party over his travelling expenses, that they intend to get the sections to pass resolutions against him and, afterwards, to denounce him as a *swindler* in a circular addressed to the working men's parties of Europe. She even had the cheek to suggest I tell Kautsky that he would be well-advised not to print anything further of Aveling's. And, withal, never the slightest suggestion that the accused might at least have a right to be heard! You can imagine what my reply was![6] Well, what should arrive the day before yesterday but the Executive's first circular, full of ridiculous accusations against Aveling[7]

and not very difficult to demolish. But there is no time to be lost; the American sections have got to send their votes to New York on 15 March; and the Executive has delayed sending the circular to this country so long that putting up a defence is virtually impossible. Aveling is in Hastings, whither he was sent by the doctor, and will be home on Friday. In the meantime we are sending out a circular announcing his intention of defending himself and asking that the vote be suspended until then. As soon as he returns we shall set to work on the defence. I enclose Aveling's first circular on this affair which is conclusive enough so far as fundamen- tals are concerned. It would be useful to know whether the Executive has sent its circular to the *Parti ouvrier* or to the Germans in Paris; in Zurich Kautsky has already taken what steps are necessary. But, with all this going on you will realise how exceedingly busy Tussy is.

I no longer remember whether I wrote and told you that Fortin is satis- fied with the arrangement with Laura in regard to his manuscript,[8] so all that remains to be done is to let Lavigne know that his manuscript is with you, and this I would ask you to do since I do not know whether his old address is still the right one and am therefore unable to write to him.

I do not know whether you have seen *Materialismul economical lui Karl Marx de Lafargue!*[9] I have seen a notice of it in the Jassy *Revista Sociala,* of December, in which there is a translation of my *Socialiste* article[10] —pretty crude as it happens. Roumanian is a funny sort of language. Their term for 'to work' is *lucrare*—in Latin *to appropriate surplus value;* the working man, on the other hand is *muncitorul*, a word of Slav origin of which the literal and etymological equivalent is the Russian *moutchitel,* meaning *martyr.* For rebellion they use the Slav word *rascaole,* that is to say, ecclesiastical schism (Russian *raskolnik,* schis- matic, heretic). In fact, for a Latin language it is fairly difficult, since they maltreat Latin and Slav (from which many of their words and sounds are derived) with disarmingly impartial nonchalance. Bulgarian (a Bulgarian Journal has been sent to Kautsky) is much easier for anyone familiar with Russian or Serbian.

Laura will have seen our reply to Professor Menger,[11] in the February number of the *Neue Zeit.*

From all that I have seen the French press is adopting an excellent attitude towards Bismarck's foolish provocations.[12] The man's tempera- ment is such that it's impossible to say whether he does or does not want war. But anything that forces upon him the necessity either of staying pacifically at home or of becoming an overt aggressor can only benefit ourselves. He has today reached the same stage with France as he had reached with William[13] in May 1866, after paving the way for the Austrian war[14] which the latter abhorred: 'I have succeeded in leading the old horse to water, but I cannot make him drink.' And if the French stand their ground Bismarck will be in the devil of a mess. He already hopes to attain a majority with the help of the people. The Pope[15] will have ensured his septennium (having voted him the new regiments for three years, they will let him have them for seven)[16] but, if the majority in the Reichstag remains in opposition on all other issues, Bismarck will not get a farthing. In the meantime everyone is agreed that all parties in Germany have reason to fear electoral defeat save for the Socialists, who are certain to have a resounding victory.

Zetkin has asked me to let him have a letter for the meeting of the 19th. I shall send it you tomorrow. I don't know yet what to say.[17]

Give Laura a kiss from me,

Yours ever

F. E.