---
id: MECW48-212
title: "Letter to Hermann Engels, August 22, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 August 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in *Deutsche Revue,* Jg. 46, Bd. III, 1921 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

Eastbourne, 22 August 1889

4 Cavendish Place

Dear Hermann,

The statement of account received with thanks; no doubt it will be correct.

Would you be so kind as to forward the enclosed note to young or now, I suppose, old Caspar[1] —I don't know whether he lives in Krefeld or Barmen. As I learn from R. Blank, whom I ran into here a week ago, things aren't going too well with those chaps; if so, I am sorry.

I have been here a fortnight but am, alas, having more rain than I can do with. Ever since the English have begun holding their naval manoeu- vres in August, the weather during that month has been truly atrocious and yesterday the words of the old song came true here:

On *21 August,* just gone by, *In storm and rain* there came a spy, Who tidings to the prince did give, etc.[2]

In consequence of which three big warships sailed past this morning, but we still await the famous naval battle which is to take place in the Channel, before our very eyes.

I shall probably be staying here another fortnight or three weeks, if the rain isn't too bad, for

'Back to my home I cannot go', the place being full of whitewashers, paperers, painters and other work- men, who make three-quarters of the rooms uninhabitable and, once they're in the house, you never know when you'll be rid of them again. This is because in England large-scale industry has ruined the crafts but has not been able to find anything else to put in their place. For a long time now the Germans have not had the sole prerogative of providing shoddy wares in return for good money; the Londoners have a positively stunning aptitude for this. In America, however, it's altogether different. So far as ordinary, everyday business dealings are concerned, in which no speculation is involved, America is, I believe, the most reliable country in the world—the only one in which you will still find 'good workmanship'.

I trust you are all well. Much love to Emma[3] and to the children and grandchildren, as well as to the rest of the Engels-kirchen, from

Your old

Friedrich