---
id: MECW48-217
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, September 26, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "26 September 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx, u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906, and, in full"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

[London], 26 September 1889

Thanks for the *Volkszeitung,* etc. I was much tickled by the revolution in a tea-cup you have had over there.[1] May possibly be a turn for the better. The progress of Nemesis is slow but sure and, by a quirk of history, it's the very people who have always relied on the support of the New Yorkers against the bulk of the party, especially that in the West, who are now being overthrown by the New Yorkers.

Haven't heard a word from the Russian.[2] Will return his postcard in my next.[3]

If I'm writing no more than a postcard it's because there's so much work to do. Awaiting me on my return from Eastbourne was the news that a fourth edition of *Capital,* Vol. I, was wanted. Though only a few alterations and additional notes will be needed, they will have to be selected and worked out all the more carefully, and the printed text will require a minute scrutiny in order that no distortion of the sense slips through. Again, the references to Book III will now have to be made more precise.

The dock strike[4] was magnificent. Tussy was involved and worked like a Trojan and the envy aroused by the position she thus gained is already becoming apparent in sundry quarters. I am sending you Harney's article which was quoted in the *Labour Elector.*[5] The old chap's laid up 12 miles away from here; in August he almost gave up the ghost, but is now better. Lenchen thanks you for the *Kalender*[6] and sends her regards. In France Guesde has a chance of getting in on the second ballot. Unfortunately I have no precise news about the elections. Kindest regards to your wife and to the Schlüters.

Your

F.E.

The *Nationalzeitung* of Boston (Nos 1-5) received with thanks. They're the local *Fabians*.