---
id: MECW48-031
title: "Letter to Florence Kelley, May 7, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "7 May 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in the language of the original (English), in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY

IN NEW YORK

London, 7 May 1887

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

I have received your note of April 25 with thanks *but no preface;* if I receive it per next steamer on Monday I shall send you word at once. In the meantime as I received no copy of the book[1] as yet, will you please see that I get at least something to work upon, a proof-sheet or whatever it is, as the *Volkszeitung* translation[2] cannot pass under any circumstances, I shall work at the translation as fast as my inflamed eye will allow. I am only sorry you did not send the ms. or a proof as soon as the idea of a separate German edition occurred to you.[3]

Sorge writes to me:

'Wischnewetzky's bedauern sehr, durch die Verheimlichungen und Unterschlagungen der Executive zur Absendung des bekannten Briefs an Dich veranlasst worden zu sein, und haben sich alle erdankliche Mühe gegebeng, Aveling in der New Yorker Sektion Gerechtigkeit zu verschaffen.'[4][5]

If this, as I must suppose, was written with your consent, then I am perfectly satisfied, and have no desire whatever to return to that subject in a spirit of controversy.

Nobody was more rejoiced than I when I learnt that the book was finally out of the hand of that despicable Executive and of the Socialist Labor Party[6] generally. Forty years' experience have shown me how useless and literally thrown away are all these publications, by small cliques, that by their very mode of publication are excluded from the general book-market, and thereby from literary cognizance. It was the same thing even with the party publications in Germany up to 1878; and only since the *Sozialistengesetz*[7] which forced our people to organize a book trade of their own[8] in opposition both to the government and to the officially organized Leipzig book-trade, has this been overcome. And I do not see why in America where the movement begins with such gigantic and imposing force, the same mistakes, with the same drawbacks in their wake, should be quite unnecessarily gone through over again. The whole Socialist, and, in England, Chartist literature has thereby been made so extinct that even the British Museum cannot now procure copies at any price!

I remain, dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

very sincerely yours

F. Engels