---
id: MECW48-034
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, May 21, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "21 May 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. 2 (1887-1890), Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original in Marx-Engels Collected Work"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 21 May 1887

My dear Laura,

A few words in a hurry. There is hope of a place for Martignetti in Hamburg—correspondence about this has kept me busy to-day.[1] You will have seen *injustice* how Hyndman has tried to bring out Edward's American bother,[2] but has apparently got more than he expected[3] —his retreat in this week's No. is undignified enough.[4] A 3rd Circular on this affair is in the printer's hands.[5] 1 have had some droll correspon- dence with Liebknecht about the letter from him it will publish. In New York we are completely victorious and that is the chief point; and our final circular I hope will settle the business.

Paul's success is though externally negative, still quite satisfactory.[6] Only the ballotage seems to have been attempted on rather too Parisian grounds. However it gives him a better standing for the future.

I confess the success of Brousse and Co. is inconceivable to me.[7] It is no use crying after a new *journal quotidien[8] * after having been kicked out of ever so many and after having secured so little permanent effect out of it while our friends had it.[9] But all the same the next best thing to a victory of our people is the entry of Brousse and Co. into the City Council—there they will have to show what they are. Cremer, Howell and Co. were never lower in London than now since they are in Parliament.

My congratulations to Paul for having cudgelled one of his electors. *Ça doit avoir produit un effet[10] *

My eye is considerably better since I have taken to smoke different cigars. There was the determining cause of the whole affair. You may laugh but I shall as soon as I have time explain to Paul medicinally that the thing was entirely caused by applying too much guano to the tobacco-fields of the Vuelta Abajo, Of course I have to be very careful still, limit reading and writing. I am rather curious to see how the Ministerial crisis in France will end[11] —unless it brings in Clemenceau, it will be the old affair over again, and I doubt whether Clemenceau will go in just now. He is the last resource of the bourgeois republic and would be soft to go in without a dissolution.

Edward and Tussy speak to-day in an open air meeting in Victoria Park, Hackney; the weather was boisterous and wet though, showery up to 4 p.m., now better. Don't know the hour of meeting, but hope it's late in the afternoon. Their agitation in the East End is going on quietly and steadily.[12] Next Sunday Delegate Conference of the League.[13] Will decide its fate. Both League and Federation[14] are in a bad way; Hyndman is in very bad odour again amongst his lot, has fallen out with Champion, and Burns goes about preaching an independent union of the working men of both societies leaving Hyndman, Morris, Aveling and Co. to fight out their quarrels themselves.

So much for to-day - the implacable Nim calls with the dinner-bell.

Affectionately yours

F. Engels