---
id: MECW48-180
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, April 20, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "20 April 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in: *Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus, Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky,* Prag, 1935 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Wor"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN VIENNA

London, 20 April 1889

Dear Kautsky,

As regards Schlesinger, I shall have a word with Liebknecht when he comes over here in about a fortnight. I have already written to him outlining the essential points. But you might be so good as to send me the thing[1] —stuff of this sort is unobtainable over here and I shouldn't like to be in the position of having to accept everything he says at its face value.

As to Schmidt, I have advised him to send you the ms. and see whether you can place it.[2] Schmidt has quietly developed into a Marxian and, as a result, no longer has any prospect of a university career, having been turned down by Halle—that noble university is confessional!—as a dissident and by Leipzig as a socialist,[3] while the Swiss have begged him to spare them his presence. Just now he is trying to get someone to publish the thesis he wrote for his *habilitation*[4] the academic socialists[5] tell him it is too Marxist and really won't do. So the publishers are none too many. Schmidt came over to us entirely of his own accord, without any prompting and, indeed, despite numerous indirect warnings from myself, simply because he could not set his face against the truth. As things are today that is greatly to his credit and he has, moreover, acted most courageously.

Now the point is that I am the very person who *must* not read and pass an opinion on his ms. He is seeking to reply to the question I raised in the preface to Volume II.[6] But I mustn't come out prematurely with the contents of Volume III, and that is what is preventing me from taking a direct hand in the business. So I can't be of any help to you this time.

He—Schmidt—has thrown himself into journalism in Berlin; how he'll get on I have no idea. At all events he has behaved with more energy and good sense than I credited him with. For a journalist, his style is quite exceptionally ponderous, but that, after all, doesn't matter much in Germany.

I hope Louise gets through her last six weeks all right, and that she'll then take a rest.[7] That damned Paris congress is causing me nothing but vexation. What a muddle! Ede helps me and I help him, where possible, and Tussy helps us both, but for the rest all is chaos.

Your lieutenant[8] hasn't been here yet. On the other hand we have Schorlemmer with us. The weather is glorious. Nim and I were in Highgate[9] today—three hours' stroll. But it's now time for a meal and—at 5.30—for the post.

Kindest regards from us all to Louise and yourself.

Your

F. E.