---
id: MECW48-016
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, March 10, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 March 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* II, Paris, 1956 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE[1]

IN PARIS

London, 10 March 1887

My dear Laura,

Pleasant news. The first edition of *Capital*[2] 500 copies, is sold with the exception of about 50 copies and the 2nd edition is in preparation. Nearly half the edition, as far as I can calculate, has gone to America[3] and the 2nd edition will still find a good market there unless a piratical edition is brought out which however will not probably be undertaken before the success of the book in America is manifest and moreover it will take some time. As the clichés are there, the 2nd edition will soon be in the market, and on that we shall have 3/9 in every copy instead of 3/- as on the first. It will again be a 30/- edition.[4]

We saw the article in the *Athenaeum*[5] and Tussy will send you a copy. It is very fortunate that the press begins to speak of the book just as the 1st edition is sold out, and the *Athenaeum* article is worth a good deal to us. The gentlemen of the press evidently did not know exactly how to speak of the book, hence the delay, but now the *Athenaeum* has given them the key-note, the others are sure to follow suit.

Between the above and what follows lies a long-winded visit from old Jakins the house agent who took the rent and payment for coals and two glasses of gin and a cigar—a repeated ringing of the dinner-bell to drive the old fellow away—successful at the third repetition—then a rather heavy dinner with Nim's potato-cakes as a wind-up, and so I am wound up, but not for letter-writing. I think you will not be sorry if under these circumstances I make no further attempt, but proceed at once to subscribe myself.

Yours affectionately

F. Engels