---
id: MECW48-126
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, August 6, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 August 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance, t.* Il, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 6 August 1888

My dear Laura,

When you receive this letter I shall be floating away on the *City of Berlin,* with Tussy, Edward, and Schorlemmer towards the shores of the New World.[1] The plan has been of pretty long standing, only it was constantly being crossed by all sorts of obstacles, last not least Schorlemmer's misadventure—but he will be here tonight[2] (fresh accidents excepted) and tomorrow we expect to be off, leaving Liverpool landing-stage at five p.m. on Wednesday.[3] The affair had to be kept secret, firstly because indeed of the series of obstacles which threatened to wreck it, and secondly in order to save me as much as possible from the interviewers of the *New York Volkszeitung* and others (among whom, Sorge writes, little Cuno is now one of the most formidable) and from the delicate attention of the German Socialist Executive, etc. of New York,[4] on arrival, as that would spoil all the pleasure of the trip and undo all its purpose. I want to see and not to preach, and principally to have a complete change of air, etc., in order to get finally over the weakness of the eyes, and chronic conjunctivitis which Dr Reeves, Edward's friend, says is due entirely to want of tone and will most likely give way to a long sea voyage, etc. When I proposed the job to Schorlemmer, he fell in at once, but of course must be back by beginning of October, so that his Flushing accident came at a very awkward time. But that seems all right now and he is due tonight.

Edward and Tussy will not come back with us, as far as we can see; they are sure to be kept there at least a fortnight longer.

Our travellers arrived here all right, though half an hour behind time, on Saturday and as our post-card will have informed you, your currants—both raw and in the juice extracted by Helen—I mean Nim—found the fullest and most general appreciation; the enthusiasm as to your garden is almost wild in its manifestations and I think both Pumps and Nim dream of it. In spite of their partly rough passage neither was sick, they were wise enough to lay down at once.

I enclose a cheque for £25—to go on with during my absence. Shall let you hear again on arrival and report on adventures, sea-monsters, icebergs and the other wonders of the sea, unless captured by the Irish fleet which has succeeded in breaking the blockade of the English on Saturday night and is now destroying British commerce, capturing Scotch coast towns, etc.[5] —a capital augury of the real political victory of the Irish over the British philistine which the next general election is sure to bring.

So farewell until then. I was very proud to hear from Nim that you look very well and younger than ever. Hope you will keep so till our next merry meeting

Ever yours affectionately

F. Engels

and kindest regards to Paul.