---
id: MECW48-147
title: "Letter to August Bebel, October 25, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 October 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 25 October 1888

Dear Bebel,

I have sent you through Schlüter *Der Hülferuf der deutschen Jugend* together with its sequel, *Die Junge Generation,* Weitling's periodical of the forties. Schlüter had got the other stuff and has sent it to you; the *Garantien, Das Evangelium des armen Sünders,* etc.[1]

In my view, it would be better to distinguish between the 3 trends in the German movement during the forties. There is very little connection between them, Weitlingian communism[2] in particular having remained aloof until it fizzled out or its members came over to us—a phase which does not figure in the literature on the subject. As regards the history of 'true socialism'[3] (Hess up to a point, Grün and a number of other belletrists), the material in the archives[4] is far from complete, and use would have to be made besides of Marx's and my old mss.[5] Which, however, I can in no circumstances allow out of my possession. Again, a great deal of what went on behind the scenes—notably the estrangement between Hess and ourselves—and what cannot be dismissed in a couple of lines, would be indispensable here, and this would mean that I myself would have to go through all the old stuff again. Finally, as regards the third trend—our own—the course of its development can be studied nowhere save in the old mss., while its *outward* history was recorded by me in the introduction to the *Communist Trial.*[6] Weitlingian communism, on the other hand, is a subject all on its own and accounts of it are available in print.

Here it occurs to me that you ought also, perhaps, to have Kuhlmann's book—the prophetic religion that succeeded Weitling in Switzerland and to which many of his followers were converted.[7] I completely forgot to give it to Schlüter.

I enclose a letter from Weitling to Hess (from the archives). It was at a meeting of a small band of close associates that the breach between Weitling and ourselves took place. (An account of the said meeting, written by Annenkov, a Russian who was present, also appeared in the *Neue Zeit* a few years ago.)[8] What happened was as follows: Hess had been to Westphalia (Bielefeld, etc.); the chaps there—Lüning, Rempel *et al*—wished, he said, to put up the money for the publication of our writings.[9] Then Weitling came up with the proposal that his disquisitions re his Utopian system be placed with them forthwith, as also his other great works (including a new grammar in which the dative was abolished as the invention of aristocrats)[10] —things we would have had to criticise and combat the moment the plan came off. The letter shows the distorted form in which our arguments were reflected in Weitling's mind. Everywhere he saw nothing but professional jealousy, nothing but an attempt to suppress his genius, to 'come between him and the sources of money'. But in points 5 and 6 of his resume the fundamental difference between him and ourselves emerges plainly enough, and that's the main thing.[11]

P. 3, lines 10-12: This refers to our intention of bringing out the great Utopians in German translation *with critical introductions and notes*—as opposed to the piffling accounts by Lorenz Stein, Grün[12] *et al.* In this poor Weitling sees only unfair competition with *his* system.

P. 3, bottom: E. is Ewerbeck in Paris. N.B. It finally transpired that Moses[13] had omitted to tell us the essentials, namely that all the Westphalians had offered was to *guarantee other publishers* against the *losses* they might make on our stuff. Moses had led us to believe that they, the Westphalians, would *themselves* undertake publication. As soon as we learnt what the position was, we naturally washed our hands of the whole business; to be writers guaranteed by the Westphalians was something that would never have occurred to us.

The affair of the Kautskys has astonished us all. Louise has conducted herself throughout with exceptional heroism. Kautsky was in a state of complete euphoria but was sadly sobered down when jilted within 5 days by his new beloved, who thereupon got engaged to his brother Hans. Now they both intend to wait and see how things go; the strangest part of it is that Louise is now complaining how unfair we are all being to Karl! I have written and told Kautsky that it's the silliest thing he has ever done and, if Louise thinks this too unkind, I suppose I shall have to return my sword to its scabbard.

I am now working on Volume III of *Capital.* I am still supposed to take great care of my eyes and not write for more than 2 hours daily and that only by daylight. So my correspondence will have to be severely curtailed.

Regards to Singer.

Your

F. Engels