---
id: MECW48-049
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, July 15, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "15 July 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in *F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Colle"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 15 July 1887

My dear Laura,

Thanks for your letters. I have Schorlemmer still here; a chronic catarrh of the stomach, the great heat, and the absence of a very pressing wish to revisit his dear country keep him here. Besides him, Fritz Beust from Zürich, whom you saw here eight years ago, has arrived too. So I must confine myself to urgent matters.

I was obliged to give a card of introduction (to Paul) to a young Dr Conrad Schmidt of Königsberg, who dabbles in *question sociale.* He is about the greenest youth I ever saw, he was here about 3 months, seems a decent fellow, as decent fellows go nowadays, *frisst keine Schuhnägel und säuft keine Tinte[1] * If Paul deposits him in rue Richelieu, Bibliothèque nationale, he will not trouble him much. He admires Zola in whom he has discovered the *materialistische Geschichtsanschauung[2] *

The Boulanger fit of paroxysm[3] ought to make our people demand again and again *l'armement du peuple* as the only guarantee against Caesaristic velleities on the part of popular generals. That is the only argument against the outcry of the Royalist press with regard to Boulanger being a danger to—the Republic they say, and the future monarchy they mean.

Saturday week, 23 July, we move to Eastbourne, 4 Cavendish Place,[4] same as last year. If your Jersey trip is realised, let us know. I should not wonder if Tussy and Edward caught the Jersey fever.

Love from Nim, Jollymeier.

Yours affectionately

F. Engels