---
id: MECW48-048
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, June 30, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "30 June 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engls, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906, and, in full,"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE[1]

IN MOUNT DESERT

London, 30 June 1887

Dear Sorge,

Have received letters, etc., up to 16 June. I shall write and tell the Wischnewetzkys[2] to word the note thus: 'to repudiate the silly calumnies to which Aveling has been exposed as a result of his American propaganda tour'.[3] If they don't like that either, I shall tell them to refer to you and you may, if necessary, authorise them to *delete the entire note.* For I cannot possibly cite Aveling without saying a word about all *that* nonsense.

Aveling sends the enclosed postcard re Time.[4] The copies will have gone to Rochester.

The business of Scribner's advertisement for *Capital* has the appear- ance of a deliberate piracy.[5] Thanks for the information; I shall pass it on to Sonnenschein. So far as I know, Scribner is *not* Sonnenschein's agent in New York.

That the members of the Executive should have believed they had bought Liebknecht's silence with the electoral funds[6] was predictable and not altogether unjustified. Luckily Liebknecht's first boastful letter had put him wholly in my power[7] and of this, when he tried to with- draw, I made the most determined use.

Over here Hyndman has been continually defaming Aveling,[8] in which he is strongly abetted by Aveling's reticence about such things. If we could catch the fellow out just once, he'd have cause to remember it. However, he is gradually bringing about his own demise. He's so wretchedly envious that he cannot tolerate a rival and is openly or secretly at war with all and sundry. And Aveling is at last eager for the fray and Tussy will see to it that he stays that way.

You mustn't forget what I told you about *la* Schack. The creature wants to come back and is *partout* determined to cut a figure over here. So it's better to know exactly what she's up to. The affair between her and the Wischnewetzkys caused the Kautskys and Avelings much glee; may very well have had something to do with her going over to the Anarchists so as to prove that she had finished with us. Liebknecht writes to say that, in a letter to Dresden, she came out with the shock- ing news that Aveling already had a previous wife from whom he was not divorced, and that he lived with Tussy without being married to her! So profound a secret is it in this country that any Englishman harbouring doubts on this score and desirous of making the Avelings' acquaintance, is informed of it by them *in writing* so that he cannot claim to have been kept in the dark and received under false pretences.

One day she was sentimentalising away to old Lenchen, saying how very much in love with one another the Avelings seemed to be, if only they always remained so, etc. 'Well, supposing they don't,' Lenchen burst out, 'they'll just part company again, and that will be that.' Which brought Madame Tittle-Tattle up sharp—she hadn't expected Lenchen to take such a practical view of things.

I have written to Lafargue[9] telling him to send the *Socialiste* to you at Rochester, but have had no reply.

I trust the warm weather will put you to rights again. It is doing me a power of good. During these four weeks of drought I have had all my windows wide open and lived so to speak in the open air; I find it as good as a visit to a spa and am also hoping it will make my eyes better again.

I am sick to death of Father McGlynn and George is turning out to be a proper founder of sects. Not that I really expected anything else; considering how recent the movement is, however, this was a transi- tional stage that could hardly have been avoided. Such people must be given the length of their tether; the masses will learn only from the consequences of their own mistakes.

I wish you a good recovery and good weather in Mount Desert!

Your

F. Engels