---
id: MECW48-010
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, February 12, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 February 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere*, Stuttgart, 1906 and in full i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 12 February 1887

Dear Sorge,

Got your letter of 30 January yesterday, and the day before yesterday sent off sundry items to you. More to follow in a few days' time. *Capital* in English[1][2] is selling very well; the jackass of a publisher,[3] who had no idea what he had got hold of, is quite astonished.

I trust your health is improving. Abstemiousness is something I, too, am obliged to observe; every day brings some little physical contretemps that cannot be ignored and interferes with one's customary *devil-may-care* way of life. Well, that's something that can't be helped.

When Lafargue was here at Christmas he promised me to send you the *Socialiste* regularly. Not until *after* his return did I get a few extra copies of the article *Situation,* etc.[4] It has opened the eyes of the French to the fact that, for them, war would mean the end of the Republic—unless, of course, circumstances were *quite* exceptionally favourable, so that it might provoke a European revolution, which, however, is wanted neither by the bourgeois, the petty bourgeois nor the peasants. No one had thought of this before and now everyone's saying it. I am now reading the article in Romanian, in *Revista Sociala,* a muddle-headed publication, appearing in Jassy, and learning the language as I go along.

The gentlemen of the Socialist Labor Party's Executive are behaving quite outrageously towards the Avelings.[5] When, thanks to their indiscretion, if not at their instigation, the article appeared in the *Herald,* another quite outrageous article, for which, at the moment, I can only hold Mr Douai responsible, appeared in the *Volkszeitung.*[6] The Avelings' reply to the calumny in the *Herald* was the enclosed circular, which was sent off from here on about 18 January to all sections and also to the Executive.[7] Well, on the 28th January the latter induced someone,[8] whom I may not name for the present and whose identity you must therefore guess, to write me an embarrassed letter in which it is stated as fact, indubitable fact, that Aveling had attempted to swindle them and that—or so their Christian charity led them to suppose—he had fiddled the accounts he submitted in order to cover his wife's hotel expenses (the party *only* paid Tussy's rail fares), nor did the return of the $176 alter the case, for that was in no way the point at issue, etc. Nothing but insinuations and not one solitary fact, not even a *definite accusation.* Then it goes on to say that a resolution had already been obtained from the New York sections and was to be endorsed by the remaining sections after which a circular denouncing Aveling would be issued to all the European parties. And I am requested to warn Kautsky against printing anything else by a blackguard like Aveling, who is to be chucked out of all the party organs!

You can imagine what kind of reply I made to these base assertions. If I can find someone to copy out the letter, I shall send it to you for, having an inflamed eye, I cannot make a third copy. These people haven't the shadow of a pretext. For on 23 December, when Aveling first learnt in a letter from Rosenberg that the Executive proposed to query some of the items in his account, he at once replied to Rosenberg, sending the following letter per special messenger:

'I cannot discuss money matters with the Party, and am ready to accept anything without discussion that the National Executive of the Socialist Labor Party thinks right!'

And that was before he knew what they were going to say and how they would treat him! And then the chaps go and pocket the $176, which, by their own calculation, belongs to the Avelings, and declare, *for that very reason,* that not they, but Aveling, is a swindler!

Well, we shall clear the matter up all right. But unfortunately we over here don't know anyone in New York save for yourself on whom we can rely, now that even the *Volkszeitung* has behaved so egregiously. I should be grateful if you could let us know how Shevich and the others are behaving and whether or not they have already succumbed to the lies of the Executive. Then we should at least know to whom we could turn in New York without having to bother you. But I can't help wondering how it is that those same New Yorkers who fulminate against the Chicago jury[9] should, in this instance, outdo the jury in turpitude, and pass judgment on people without even giving them a hearing or, for that matter, telling them what they are charged with.

Your

F. E.