---
id: MECW48-273
title: "Letter to August Bebel, May 9, 1890"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 May 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN PLAUEN NEAR DRESDEN

London, 9 May 1890

Dear Bebel,

Thank you for your news from Zurich—I am glad that we should have arrived at the same opinion in regard to this point too.[1] *Your* corroboration was of particular importance to me, the likes of us being so dependent in matters of this sort upon conclusions that are inade- quately founded as to feel reluctant to use those unreliable conclusions as a basis for further inferences, let alone actions, without corroboration from an authoritative quarter.

My hearty congratulations to you and your wife on your daughter's engagement.[2] The fact that it will eventually mean her emigrating to America is certainly most unpleasant for you, though for me it might have the agreeable consequence of our some day making a trip together across the Atlantic. What do you feel about it? I am firmly convinced that you would get over your sea-sickness within 2 or 3 days and quite possibly for good and all. And a sea voyage of that kind is an invaluable antidote to wear and tear—even now, almost two years later, I can still feel the beneficial effects of my jaunt. Moreover, Zadek claims to have discovered a sure remedy for sea-sickness (anti-pyrin is said to be excel- lent) and, according to medical opinion, only 2 or 3 per cent of all human beings are unable to get used to the motion within 2 or 3 days. So consider the matter.

If you find my article[3] wanting in logic, the fault lies probably more with me than with Bios. To compress such a lengthy and complex matter into less than 2 printed sheets is a difficult feat and I am aware that there are all too many passages in which the thread gets lost and the reasoning is inadequate. In the event of my going into the subject—which is of the greatest importance to us—in rather more detail, some critical notes from you would be very welcome indeed just brief indications as to *where* you lost the thread and *bow* you think it got snarled up.

Well, no doubt the bourgeoisie will everywhere have had time enough to sweat out the fear inspired in them by the First of May and to wash the linen they dirtied in consequence. The *Daily News* correspondent in Berlin, one of the most vociferous Jeremiahs, complained on the First of May that the workers had made April fools of all and sundry, nor, until 4 days later, did the truth dawn on him that, despite the workers having insistently declared beforehand that all they wanted was a *peaceable* demonstration, no one had believed them.

You did perfectly right in so arranging things as to preclude the possi- bility of clashes. After 20 February[4] there is no longer any need for the German workers merely to kick up a row. Under the circumstances Germany was *bound* to make a more modest showing on the First of May than the others did, and no one thought the worse of you for that, either here or in France. But there is, I think, *one* lesson to be drawn from the Schippel business,[5] namely the need to ensure that, next time there's an interregnum between the general elections and the convoca- tion of the Reichstag, the leadership of the parliamentary group is either empowered to continue functioning as before, or is expressly reinstated in office by the newly elected representatives for the period of the inter- regnum. It could then confidently intervene and also act, if necessary, while the gentlemen in Berlin, who would like to behave Paris-fashion, as though they were *natural* party leaders, would not be given the opportunity of throwing their weight about prematurely. Always providing that, after 1 October,[6] the organisation stays as it is.

Over here the demonstration on 4 May[7] was quite *overwhelming,* as the entire bourgeois press actually had to admit. I was on platform 4 (a heavy goods waggon) and could only see part—a fifth, say, or an eighth—of the crowd, but it was one vast sea of faces, as far as the eye could reach. Between 250,000 and 300,000 people, about 3/4 of them demonstrating workers. Aveling, Lafargue and Stepniak spoke from my platform—I was just an onlooker. Lafargue, with his mixture of south- ern vivacity and excellent English—if spoken with a strong French accent—elicited a storm of applause. So did Stepniak, while Ede, who was on the same platform as Tussy, was accorded a stunning reception. Each of the 7 platforms was 150 metres away from the next, the last ones being 150 metres from the edge of the park,[8] so that *our* meeting (the one in favour of international legal enforcement of an 8 hours working day)