---
id: MECW48-168
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, February 23, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "23 February 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the original"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE[1]

IN HOBOKEN

London, 23 February 1889

Dear Sorge,

Your postcard of 19 January and letter of 10 February received.[2] I take *The Labor Standard* and shall give Mrs Wischnewetzky's articles to Tussy, who will use them, should the 'Labor Movement' happen to be re-issued. The stuff in them is typical of America. Neglect of fire precau- tions, etc., on that scale simply would not pay in Europe. But it's the same attitude as you take to railroads and everything else; provided only that they *exist,* no matter how, that is sufficient.

Thank you for the item on Appleton.[3] On being approached, Sonnenschein said he had sold 500 copies of the cheap edition to Appleton.

I didn't see *Der arme Teufel.* It is Motteler's favourite reading and that is something no one will begrudge him. Any remarks it makes about

[4]

I shall write and tell Kautsky what you have said about Rappaport.[5]

Lack of material and a desire to be versatile mean that many get in who have no business to be there. Kautsky has been in Vienna since July and won't be returning here before July.

I have sent you *The Holy Family* by registered book packet along with some French stuff. *But you mustn't tell Schlüter that I sent it to you;* I had more or less promised him my spare copy for the archives[6] before my trip to America, but you come first. It will probably arrive in March or April.

In addition to this—all of them by today's post—there's a further parcel of French stuff as well as *Commonweal* and *Gleichheit.* Lafargue's and Deville's lectures[7] are no longer to be had here and I can't get a reply out of the authors. However I keep pegging away at them.

You will have received the copies of the *Egalité.* The Blanquists have had no luck with their *Cri du Peuple;* having bored people to tears, they found themselves compelled to join forces with Guesde, Lafargue, etc. (which Vaillant wanted to do from the beginning but was outvoted). In addition there are a few discontented Radicals. Up till now they have all got on well together—let's hope it will remain so. Some more copies will go off shortly.

During the latest election in Paris the Possibilists thoroughly disgraced themselves and actively supported the Opportunist Jacques.[8]

The workers are now beginning to desert them. In the provinces, which are far better than Paris, they have lost all support. Their attempt, with the help of the English Trades Unions and of Hyndman, their trusty ally over here, to arrange an international congress in Paris *without* our Frenchmen but with the Belgians, Danes, Dutch and hence, or so they hoped, the Germans as well, is proving an ignominious failure. The Germans say they will not attend *either* congress if 2 of them are held in Paris. And both parties have been summoned to a conference at The Hague on the 28th of this month;[9] of the Germans, Liebknecht, Bebel and Bernstein will be there, and so will the Dutch and Belgians. Lafargue is going. So they must either eat humble pie or face universal opposition.

In Germany things are getting more and more confused. Now that old William[10] is dead and Bismarck is tottering, the philistines have lost all confidence in the wielders of power. That vain young fool,[11] the new, greater version of Old Fritz[12] *(pour rire*[13] *) wants to be Emperor and*

Chancellor in one; the arch-reactionaries, priests and Junkers at court are doing their utmost to incite him against Bismarck and to bring about a clash—and meanwhile little Willie is pensioning off all the old generals and replacing them with his favourites. Another three years and the commands will all be in the hands of impudent coxcombs and the army will be ripe for another Jena.[14] Bismarck knows this and that is what might induce him to embark on a quick war, especially if that vagabond Boulanger gets to the top. And then we'll have a pretty state of affairs: an alliance between France and Russia which will completely *rule out any revolution* in France, for otherwise Russia will turn against her. But I hope it blows over.

Warm regards to your wife.[15]

Your

F. E.