---
id: MECW48-088
title: "Letter to Pasquale Martignetti, January 10, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 January 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (German), in *La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895,* Milano, 1964 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collecte"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 10 January 1888

Dear Friend,

I would have written to you long ago, but could only suppose that you were no longer in Benevento, for one of the periodicals you very kindly sent me bore a different address with a domicile I didn't know. So I have been awaiting further word from you.

The ludicrous charge brought against you in connection with the embezzlement of LI5,000 is best refuted by the fact that you have been given employment by the government prefect himself. I trust that the whole intrigue will fizzle out before things get to the stage of public proceedings.

I don't know how the Hamburg business passed off; I have heard no further news on the subject from Wedde.[1] But it is just as well that nothing has come of it. The Prussian government has at last managed to bring the government of the Hamburg 'republic' to heel. Our newspa- per there[2] has been banned; Wedde, the editor, though a citizen of Hamburg, has been banished from his native city, and some twenty socialists have been sentenced in Altona (the neighbouring Prussian town) and will, on release, be expelled from Hamburg. Under the circumstances you too would have been expelled from there and, as a foreigner, from the German Empire as a whole; and the cost of the double removal complete with family would have been ruinous.

I am grateful for the trouble you are taking over my biography and shall be happy to go over your translation.[3] But I doubt whether it would be worth your while getting it published as a pamphlet. After all, I'm as good as unknown in Italy and among those who do happen to know me there are many anarchists, by whom I am hated rather than loved. But I leave this to you.

I shall also be able to attend to your manuscript within the next few weeks, after which it will go off to you at once.[4] Unfortunately I still have to spare my eyes.

With sincere regards,

Yours ever,

F. Engels

*Mefistofele I* will be posted this evening.