---
id: MECW48-096
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Domela Nieuwenhuls, February 23, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "23 February 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published, in Russian, in the magazine *Istorik-Marksist,* No. 6 (40), Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FERDINAND DOMELA NIEUWENHUIS

IN THE HAGUE

London, 23 February 1888
122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

My dear Nieuwenhuis,

I informed Kautsky of the contents of your letter immediately it arrived and understand that he has since seen to everything you wanted.

The news from here is pretty good on the whole. The various socialist organisations have refrained from forcibly accelerating the natural, normal and hence somewhat slow process of development of the English working class; hence less fuss, less vainglory, but also less disappointment. Moreover they get on amongst themselves. As to setting the masses in motion, that has been taken care of by the incomprehensible stupidity of the government and the imperturbable cowardice of the Liberal opposition. The Trafalgar Square affair[1] did not simply breathe new life into the working men; the deplorable way in which the Liberal leaders behaved then and subsequently is driving more and more radical workers over to the socialists, the more so as the latter behaved very well on that particular occasion and were to be seen everywhere in the front rank. Cunninghame-Graham is a declared Marxist and at the meeting last Monday[2] demanded outright that the nation confiscate *all the means of production.* So here too we are represented in Parliament.

The best proof of how far the workers over here have advanced is provided by the radical working men's clubs[3] in the East End. What impressed them above all was the example set by the New York election campaign in November 1886;^7 for what America does makes a greater impression over here than anything the whole of the continent of Europe may do. The example set by New York made it clear to the chaps that in the end the workers would do best if they formed their own party. When the Avelings returned, they seized on this mood and since then their activities have proved most effective in these clubs[4] —the only political workingmen's organisations of any importance that exist here. Both Aveling and his wife give several lectures a week down there and exert a great deal of influence; there's no doubt that they are now the most popular speakers with the workers. The main thing, of course, is to wean the clubs from their dependence on the great Liberal Party, prepare the ground for their own labour party and gradually bring the chaps over to conscious socialism. For, as I have said, the cowardice of the Liberal leaders, as also of the majority of London Liberal and Radical Members of Parliament, has been of enormous help to us over here. The people who were elected 3 or 4 years ago as workingmen's representatives, the Cremers, Howells, Potters, etc., are already completely played out. Were a second ballot to be introduced here instead of the matter's being decided, as it now is, by a relative majority at the first ballot, we should be able to organise a labour party within six months; under the present electoral system the creation of a new, third party is made very difficult. But it will come, no question of that, and in the meantime we can content ourselves with the knowledge that we are advancing all along the line.

An English edition of the *Communist Manifesto,* revised by myself, will be coming out in the next week or two; I shall send you one—there's a big demand for it over here, which is also a good sign.

You too will have been delighted at our brilliant victory in the Reichstag in Berlin. Bebel surpassed himself.[5] He came to stay with me last autumn[6] and I only hope that gaol suits you^5 as well as it does him.[7] He says he always feels very much better afterwards (he suffers from nerves and in gaol his nervous excitation dies down).

Shall you be coming over here again next summer? With kindest regards.

Yours,

F. Engels