---
id: MECW48-184
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, May 7, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "7 May 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in English in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE[1]

AT LE PERREUX

London, 7 May 1889

My dear Laura,

I was very glad to receive this morning the Convocation.[2] As you say, there is no time to lose, and Paul who seems boiling over with virtu- ous indignation had made me expect an interminable series of bureau- cratic difficulties and delays. Now, as there has been such quick and determined action, everything is all right. The Convocation is short and sweet, contains the needful and no more, and all the fault I can find with it is that it would have been better to state *in it,* that the second circular with the signatures of the foreigners, unobtainable on account of want of time, would follow. Moreover I hope that the announcement, that the Socialist League[3] had beforehand adhered to the Hague resolutions,[4] is founded upon fact and not upon a misunderstanding, as a disavowal on their part would be awkard. As to obtaining their signature, we ought to be informed of the contents of Morris' reply to Paul, so as not to be quite in the dark.

Now will you make an English translation and Paul put at the bottom: 'For the English translation, Paul Lafargue'—and will he autho- rise me to do the same with a German translation to be made by me? We will then get them printed here at once and spread them by the thousand; also forward you copies as you may require them.

The loss of time is entirely due to Liebknecht who considers himself, or would like to figure as, the centre of the international movement, and who, being cocksure of bringing about a union, allowed himself to be led by the nose by the Belgians for six or eight weeks. Even now he is certain that if only *he* shows himself on the scene at Paris, the union will follow. But as it is not too late now, the lost time is not lost in reality. It has rallied round to the date desired by the French the mass of foreigners who at first objected and certainly would have abstained, had the date been settled without these preliminaries and against their wishes. Nobody suffers in reality through Liebknecht 's action, but we here, who, having entered upon our campaign with uncommon success, were entirely left to our own resources, as all the letters addressed by the working men here whom we had stirred up against the Possibilist congress, were replied to in the most uncertain and vague way by Danes, Dutch, Belgians and Germans; and nobody could tell them anything about the other congress, in consequence of which they fell into the hands of Smith Headingley and Hyndman. Well, as soon as the English Convocation is out, we must begin afresh and I hope with better success.

But if Paul thinks we can cram down people's throats, here in England, the *fictio juris*;[5] that the Possibilists are no socialists, that conse- quently their congress does not exist at all or does not count, he is strangely mistaken. He says Bonnier's letter to the *Labour Elector*[6] was a *bêtise*[7] because it did not start from that point of view. Now I am responsible for that *bêtise* as I wrote the letter and Bonnier only signed it. The Possibilists may be all that Paul says, and I believe him, but if he wants us to proclaim that publicly, he ought to have proved it first publicly, and *before* there was any question of a congress. Instead of that, our people made a *conspiration du silence* against themselves, left the whole wide world of publicity to the Possibilists, who anyhow were recognized as socialists by the Belgians, Dutch and Danes and some English last autumn in London[8] and the decree of excommunication launched by a party which even now has not a paper in Paris in which it can make itself heard, cannot and will not be accepted by the rest of the world without further proof.[9] We must speak to people here a language which they understand and to talk in the way Paul wants us to do, would be to make ourselves ridiculous and to be shown the door at every office of a paper in London. Paul knows too well that the Possibilists are a power in Paris, and though it may be very well for our *Parisian* friends to ignore them, we cannot do the same, nor deny the fact that there will be *two rival* congresses on 14 July. And if we were to tell people here that in our Congress 'ce *sont les* ouvriers *et les socialistes de France* sans distinc- tion de parti *qui convoquent le congrès*[10] that would not only be a *bêtise* but a gross untruth, as Paul knows well enough that the *ouvriers* de Paris, as far as they are socialists at all, are in their majority Possibilists.

Anyhow we shall here continue to work for the Congress *in our own way* and never mind faultfinding. I have not yet done a single act in this affair but it has been found fault with by someone. So I am quite used to that sort of thing and go on acting as I think is right.

The finest thing of it all is that three months after these two congresses Boulanger will be in all probability dictator of France, do away with parliamentarism, epurate the judges under pretext of corrup- tion, have a *gouvernement à poigne*[11] and a *chambre pour rire,*[12] and crush Marxists, Blanquists and Possibilists all together. And then, *ma belle France*—*tu l'as voulu*[13]

Six months after that *we may* have war—that depends entirely on Russia; she is now engaged in vast financial operations to restore her credit and cannot well go in for a fight until these are finished.[14] In that war the neutrality of Belgium and Switzerland will be the first thing that goes to smash, and if the war becomes really serious, our only chance is that the *Russians* be beaten and then make a revolution. The French cannot make one while allied to the Czar—that would be high treason. But if no revolution interrupts the war, if it is allowed to run its course, then that side will win which is joined by England, if England goes in for the war at all. For that side can then, with the help of England, starve out the other side by cutting off the corn supplies from abroad, which all Western Europe requires nowadays.

To-morrow there will be a deputation to the *Star* to protest against last Saturday's article on the Congress (Bax, Tussy, Edward)[15] which article was smuggled in, probably by Hyndman and Smith Headingly, in Massingham's absence.

Love from Nim and from

Ever yours

F E.