---
id: MECW48-023
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, April 9, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 April 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE[1]

IN HOBOKEN

London, 9 April 1887

Dear Sorge,

I wrote to you on the 6th[2] and have had your letter of 29 March. Many thanks for your efforts re Jonas.[3] I think they will bear fruit.

So the Executive intends to reply. That will mean a further suppression of facts. But the decision to reply is in itself proof of how base and silly it was to try and worm a verdict out of the sections merely on the strength of the Executive's first allegations. First the sections were supposed to decide. Then, even before the expiry of the time limit they had been set, the Executive goes and implores the Board of Supervisors for a verdict. And now the Executive itself admits that further investigations will be necessary before a decision can be reached.

At all events, the chaps have cut their own throats. And if the Wischnewetzkys who, throughout, have behaved more like Dishragskis,[4] have been forced to describe them as liars, etc., things must have come to a pretty pass. The very fact that Wischnewetzky decided to show you my letter[5] is proof of the quandary these two people are in. As much as a year ago, however, I was 'humane' enough to dismiss the Executive as true German louts.

I'm glad in as much as I can now hope to be relieved of Mrs Wischnewetzky's importunities in the matter of translations. In the first place she translates mechanically, leaving all the real work to me, in the second, having delayed publication[6] in the most deplorable way, she let the thing fall into the hands of the said louts.[7] But we are now no longer in the position of having to hawk around our manuscripts. And now that I've written a preface[8] for her into the bargain, something's evidently amiss just because the said preface is not to the liking of the Executive!

The Avelings have also had sympathetic messages and resolutions from the section in Springfield, Massachusetts; no doubt others will be coming in from the West during the next few days.

The Swiss government would seem—according to conservative English reports—to be preparing to move against the Zurich *Sozialdemokrat*.[9] I have been expecting this ever since the war-like hubbub first arose; endanger his neutrality and your Swiss turns really nasty. However, it may yet blow over.

On the other hand it looks very much as though the 2 latest assassination attempts in Russia[10] have been the last straw. For a long time no one has had any faith in the government, and now they've lost faith in the Tsar as well. The army is full of discontented, conspiring officers. The Pan-Slavs[11] want to place the half-brother[12] of the present Tsar,[13] the eldest son of Alexander II and *la* Dolgoruky on the throne. And the police are powerless against the Nihilists.[14] According to the *Frankfurter Zeitung,* 482 officers were sent from Moscow via Odessa to the convict settlement on Sakhalin in the Pacific. I don't believe that it will last out the year, unless war provides a loophole, and even that might come too late. And once the fun begins in Russia, then hurrah!

Aveling's campaign among the Radical Clubs in London's East End is making good progress.[15] The relatively successful results obtained in the recent elections in Chicago and Cincinnati[16] have been of great assistance to him here—John Bull has no wish to see himself outstripped by those fellows. It's the *only* foreign influence that is at all effective in this country. At the big Anti-Coercion meeting in Hyde Park the day after tomorrow, Aveling will be speaking from two and Tussy from one of the fifteen platforms.[17] It promises to be one of those big meetings whereby the London working men make manifest a crisis in English politics. Incidentally, the German elections,[18] too, have not failed to make an impact over here.

Are you moving to Rochester, or where?

Your

F. Engels