---
id: MECW48-013
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, February 24, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 February 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. 2 (1887-1890), Paris, Ed. sociales, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in Eng"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 24 February 1887

My dear Laura,

The *Révolution en Allemagne-Prise de Berlin*[1] —does not exactly come off in the way depicted in the *Way of the People.* The *Voie du peuple* on the other side of the Vosges is not exactly along the Boulevards of beautiful Paris. Not to speak of their mistakes about seats lost and gained, etc., the success of our German friends lies in another direction than where they seek it.[2] First of all, we have so far lost seats and not gained any, but that, though a fact, counts for nothing. The decisive fact is that, while we are very slowly losing ground in the Saxon districts of *hand-weaving* (which is dying out) and which were our original strong- holds, we are gaining far more rapidly not only in the large towns but in all rural industrial districts. I have the exact figures of 43 districts with one deputy each, including Berlin, Hamburg, Dresden, Munich, Leipzig, Hanover, Magdeburg, Elberfeld, Cologne, Düsseldorf, Nürnberg, Stuttgart, Frankfurt etc, mostly large towns of course.

In these we had in all votes 408,360 in the same places in 1884 321,876

Gained

86,484

or 27 per cent on the votes of 1884, in 3 years; and these include 5 districts in which we lost votes. In a day or two I shall have more data to extend my list which comprises all districts the figures of which I know. Berlin has come out splendidly and I begin to have some confidence in that otherwise ridiculous town.

The pressure brought to bear on our people was tremendous. Not even public proclamation of their candidates was allowed. Every one who took a part in the election by distributing *bulletins de vote*[3] etc. was noted—which means expulsion in the numerous towns under state of siege. Wherever possible, the manufacturers conducted them to the poll and saw that they voted for Bismarck unless they wanted immediate discharge from work. And all this will be repeated and increased on the day of ballotage where we expect to secure most of our seats.

Singer is the Lockroy;[4] —*le premier élu de l'Allemagne.*[5] He had 32,227 votes which no other member can boast of. Bebel is in for Hamburg, Liebknecht out for Offenbach[6] had he had 50 more votes, he would have been in the ballot at Bremen and then sure of election. But there are sure to be double elections so that he will not want the place whereon to rest his hind quarters.[7] The exact number of ballots in which we are interested I do not know; 16 at the least. These we shall almost all carry, as far as I can see—and unless we are left in the lurch by the Centre[8] or Progressists,[9] which is quite on the cards.

While ordinarily but 55 to 65% of the voters polled, this time the philistine came up in force; 85 to 90% of the number on the list. And this accounts for many defeats.

I am extremely glad of the Alsatian vote.[10] That will help us to get rid of these non-descripts—neither fish nor flesh nor good red herring—all the easier.

In a day or two you will get a printed circular with Aveling's reply to the charges of the New York Executive.[11] If this circular has not been sent to the German club in Paris, then it has not been sent to Paris at all. It is nothing but the usual complaint of *Knoten*[12] against *Gelehrte*[13] that they lived extravagantly on the pence of the working man. Fortunately we have a good reply.

Tell Paul that his discovery about Oriental Circumcision[14] shares the fate of many of my discoveries in natural science viz. that it had been made before. I have read the same thing long ago in German books and should not wonder if it was already in old Creuzer's *Symbolik*[15] which is as old as the battle of Waterloo.

Poor Edward had an awful shock about these ridiculous accusations, so soon after his quinsy. He is not over-endowed with power of resis- tance to malady, and so this threw him back very much. He has been off and on at Hastings and is going off again to-night.

The last page of the *Voie* to-day[16] looks rather queer, all *Bel Ami*[17] and no advertisements.[18] Rather too much for one dose, I should think.

Half past five—*Postschluss*[19] —and Dinner Bell! So farewell for to-day.

Very affectionately yours

F. Engels