---
id: MECW48-288
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, July 30, 1890"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "30 July 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "First published in: *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the origina"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN MOUNT DESERT[1]

[London], 30 July 1890

Schorlemmer and I are home again after our very delightful and very interesting trip to North Cape and Norway generally and, as from Sunday, I shall be able to start sending stuff to you again and make up for arrears. Morgan[2] received with many thanks, the more so as Ely's intervention was avoided. It is always disagreeable to be beholden to an intermediary. The relevant letters[3] have likewise come back and been destroyed.

The *People's Press* is also likely to go under in a fortnight's time. It was an attempt by the Fabians[4] to insinuate themselves into the leadership of the movement—at the same time there was much good will but to an even greater extent a lack of journalistic and business experience on the part of the 2 men actually running it,[5] with the result that the whole thing has got into a muddle. There'll be an unpleasant hiatus but it will, I trust, lead to the founding of an organ representative of the new *unions.*

Those two battles in Leeds were magnificent.[6] It was splendid news to be greeted with on our return.

There is also a social democratic organisation in Bergen, but we had neither the time nor the occasion to look it up; I merely saw in the newspapers that it had its own premises and had applied for a licence to sell beer.

Our trip has done us a power of good. Tussy and Edward are themselves off to Norway next week. Regards from Schorlemmer and

Your

F. E.

Also and especially to your wife.