---
id: MECW48-078
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, December 5, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 December 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Le Socialiste,* No. 110, 10 December 1887 and in full in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Printed according to the original Tr"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 5 December 1887

My dear Lafargue,

Like you, I cried **VictoryI** yesterday morning. It is clear that, had it not been for the people of Paris, the Right would not have dreamed of voting for an impossible candidate[1] and would have rallied to Ferry with the opportunists-cum-speculators.[2] In which case—battle and, as likely as not, defeat.

The drama is unfolding in complete accordance with the rules. In 1878 victory of the people and the army over the monarchists alone;[3]

in 1887 victory over the monarchists and opportunists[4] *combined.* The next victory must be victory over monarchists, opportunists and radicals[5] combined.

Clemenceau would seem after all to have contributed not a little to that result by dropping Freycinet in favour of Carnot. It was the least he could do after falling headlong into Ferry's trap. But it's better than nothing. And, circumstances being what they are, a *legal* solution of this kind, brought about under the menacing pressure of the Parisian work- ers, is all we might wish. As in the case of most days during the great revolution, it is a period of ascent.

What attitude did the soldiers adopt—those of the *line,* I mean? Peaceful victories such as this are a capital way of familiarising troops with the supremacy and infallibility of the popular masses. Another day or two of the same sort and the troops will undoubtedly mutiny.

Sadi Carnot won't do much. The presidency is done for after what has happened. The president has been reduced to a puppet, appointing and dismissing ministers at the command of the Chamber.

All the same, I hope the scandals will continue to be relentlessly followed up. Things have gone too far, I think, to be halted now. The bourgeois will cry that enough is enough, that one should display generosity and let bygones be bygones—but let us hope that the

only way for the radicals to come to power is by prosecuting the thieves.

Yours ever,

F. E.

The Social Democratic Federation was supposed to be meeting in Trafalgar Square yesterday,[6] but there wasn't a word about it in the *Daily News;* we may be sure Hyndman didn't run any risk.