---
id: MECW48-219
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, October 3, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 October 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in: *Wilhelm Liebknecht. Briefwechsel mit Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels,* The Hague, 1963 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Coll"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

[Draft]

[London,] 3 October 1889

Dear Liebknecht,

On hearing for certain that Guesde was in the second ballot, i.e. a week ago yesterday, I at once sent a most urgent letter to Bebel. What was decided I don't know.[1]

As regards your letter from Paris, I stick as firmly to my opinion concerning your conduct apropos the congress[2] in March and April as you do to yours. So it's useless to bicker over what is past.

As to the Schlesingeriad, I should be *very* happy were you to succeed in ridding yourself of it. Meanwhile you have seen that the affair cannot really be hushed up in that way and have been forced to issue a statement, which pleases me greatly.[3] Had you issued it at once, the two of us would have been spared this unpleasant correspondence. I know as well as you do, and you as well as I, that it was by no means just Kautsky and I who considered it a scandal that your name should have served to shelter a piece such as this by so worthless a fellow.

At all events your statement relieves me of the need to criticise the concoction myself. But the thing will inevitably be singled out, precisely *because* your name has unfortunately found its way onto it and not, what's more, simply as publisher, but as *editor.*

I too regard Guesde's election as highly important. So far as the number of votes is concerned, the elections have turned out very well for us. I estimate that 60,000 votes were certainly cast in favour of ourselves (of those represented at our congress) and a further 18,000 *probably* so. Against this some 43,000 throughout France for the Possibilists. Baudin seems a certainty, also Boyer, Cluseret and Ferroul and besides these there are a few others whose prospects look bright. If Guesde gets in as well, he's the sort of man round whom they would all rally. In which case the Possibilists, Joffrin and Dumay, will be in the same situation as the Lassalleans were in the Reichstag in 1874 and *then,* but *only* then, can there be any question of our having dealings with them, just as we had dealings with the Lassalleans in Germany;[4] and it is a condition of our success that until that time they should be treated as enemies and belaboured as such, that they should learn to respect the *might* of our people.

At all events Boulangism[5] is done for and will presumably be dealt further blows at the second ballots, unless the fatuous annulment of the poll in Montmartre[6] brings it new supporters, at least in Paris. If the Russians' cash then fails to appear, *le brave général* will have to move from Portland Place to Soho,[7] or rent a couple of rooms from Lessner.

Regards to your wife and Theodor.[8]

Your F. E.