---
id: MECW48-105
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, April 16, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 April 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BORSDORF NEAR LEIPZIG

London, 16 April 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

I was on the point of answering your letter of the 4th when your second one arrived with an enclosure for Karl Kautsky and giving me to understand that my answers no less than your questions were already things of the past.

All I want to do now is point out how this is connected with the Social Democratic Federation's circular.[1]

1. The Social Democratic Federation still poses as the *only* socialist organisation in England and the *only* one entitled to act and speak on behalf of the movement over here as a whole. This was why it was necessary, having regard to the preparations for the congress, to emphasise that position, the more so as the Socialist League[2] in its present form will probably fizzle out before long and the Social Democratic Federation would like to absorb the *disjecta membra.*[3] Fortunately, however, that won't come off, for if it did the same old personal squabbles would at once begin all over again.

2. The Social Democratic Federation is closely in league with the Possibilists in Paris and, since these in their turn are in league with Broadhurst & Co.,[4] the Social Democratic Federation must manoeuvre. This second reason is the crucial one. Hyndman & Co. have become so deeply embroiled with the Possibilists that they can no longer draw back, even if they wanted to.

My opinion of all this congress business? I'm barely capable of expressing one, since I haven't the faintest idea of what has been discussed and anyway views change, kaleidoscope-fashion, even in your own case. By and large I regard all such congresses as exceedingly risky unless one is absolutely sure of success from the outset and, unless something definite and attainable is to be discussed, as somewhat unnecessary. The small fry, in particular the Belgians, have the chief say and, since the foreign department in Belgium is run, not by the Flemings, but by the old Brussels clique—the Brismée family—the same old dish is served up every time. But to want to hold your congress over *here,*[5] one week *after* the Trades Unions have held theirs, would spell utter ruin. Your funds would be used up, your people would run off and you'd be irredeemably delivered up into the arms of London's wirepullers—*ad majorem gloriam Hyndmanni.*[6]

That *Geneva* is the place where the French—never mind what sort—ought to hold a congress to celebrate the French Revolution of 1789 and *à propos* of the Paris Exhibition[7] is something you'll certainly never get them to believe.

So even if your congress doesn't materialise, it will, in my view, be no great disaster. In any case the agenda is needlessly restricted. A congress convoked by our Reichstag group would, after all, be attended exclusively by socialists and anarchists, not by Trade Unionists pure and simple. A social-democratic congress could throw the anarchists out, a general workingmen's congress cannot, and they are capable of being thoroughly obstreperous.

Fritz had better make haste and perk up—from the point of view of his health; otherwise Bismarck will prove too much for him. I hope that Bismarck goes too far and gets sacked, the dissolution to be followed by fresh elections under some sort of interim administration. That would provide a nice dose of *désillusionnement* for the philistines. But obviously when you may be condemned any day to have your throat slit by the doctors[8] you're unlikely to have much zest for a serious fight. And on his own showing Bismarck is already defending himself tooth and claw.

Kindest regards.

Your

F. E.

Was the stuff we sent you on Saturday what you wanted? If not, there has been a misunderstanding. The German is by Eccarius.[9]