---
id: MECW48-079
title: "Letter to Hermann Schluter, December 7, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "7 December 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 7 December 1887

Dear Mr Schlüter,

It would be best if you were to make up a volume of *Shorter Papers, 1871-75* by F. Engels, as follows:

1. Article on Vogt, 1871, No. 38, 10 May[1]

2. *Refugee Literature*[2]

3. Tkachov's letter 4. [On] *Social Relations in Russia 5. The Bakuninists at Work*

We shall have to omit the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* article[3] for in the first place it would today require an additional explanatory section (because of our Russian friends) and, in the second, I intend at some later date to bring out a collection of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* articles by Marx and myself. We might discuss this later on.[4]

Herewith *The Bakuninists at Work* with the paragraphs in Section III correctly numbered in the order in which they should appear. Would you kindly send *this sheet* for me to look at, so that I know what I'm about. The remaining proof reading can be attended to over there.

If you could get hold of one or two copies of the *Revue* of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* (complete), I will gladly pay for them. I have only got vols 3, 5 and 6, and should like to have 1, 2 and 4 as well.

You shall have the 'Mordspatrioten'[5] shortly: I am writing the introduction. I shall also try and put the 'Force Theory' to rights.[6]

As regards other matters, 1. *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* articles, see above; 2. *Revue* of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung*—nothing that could do without an introduction and wouldn't be time-consuming; 3.1 have sold the *Prussian Military Question* to Meissner, with whom I cannot start a row, and much of what I say in it would be very difficult to understand today without a commentary.

After the New Year I shall have to tackle Volume III of *Das Kapital,* for which I must spare my eyes. Aside from what I have already undertaken, therefore, I can at present do absolutely nothing for you; I'm very sorry, but I have no alternative. As soon as this ms. has gone to press, and while correcting the proofs, I shall have time to spare for you, provided my eyes are all right again. But you must remember that I can only really write for a few hours each day and then only by daylight—often not to be had for love or money over here—and withal a vast correspondence!

With kindest regards,

Your

F. Engels