---
id: MECW48-056
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, August 9, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 August 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in *F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

Eastbourne, 9 August 1887

4 Cavendish Place

My dear Laura,

We have now been here more than a fortnight[1] and nothing to complain of but the heat. This is indeed an exceptional summer as the sneaks in *Nature* call it: 'the *Jubilee* Anticyclone'. I have taken some light work with me for a rainy day but the rainy day will not come and the work remains fast asleep in my drawer. Jollymeier was here with us for a week and Fritz Beust a fortnight—he had to begin teaching again the day before yesterday in Zürich—there was considerable and quite undisguised flirtation between Pumps and him and nobody was prouder of it than Percy. *Oh les maris!*[2]

Whoever translated that preface of mine for the *Socialiste*[3] did it exceedingly well. I never was so well done in French. One or two passages make me suspect that it was done from the German, at least in part.

The determined stand our people have made against Russophilism and Katkoffolatrie has evidently had a good effect. I see the *Justice* is coming round, and Kropotkin has tackled Rochfort. Guesde's article in *l'Action* shows that he knows more about the matter of Russia than I dared to hope for.[4]

Otherwise French, like all other, politics are under the influence of the hot weather. *Tout rate, même les duels.*[5][6]

I hope that great Polish oculist[7] will be the last and finally successful of Paul's panaceas. When he wrote before of operations, I thought they consisted in the opening out of the lachrymal duct, as this is the most common of all slight operations on the external eye. But most old men with watery eyes suffer from that *rétrécissement,*[8] and I am almost certain I have got it myself on one eye at least. But that I can get set right, if need be, in London, and before rushing into the arms and tools of that miraculous Pole, I shall await Paul's final report. There is nothing to give you such mountain-moving faith in individual doctors, as a general scepticism with regard to scientific medicine.

I have had Bax here for a week and was daily interviewed by him with the regularity of a clock and the inquisitiveness of an American journalist. But it gave me an opportunity of quiet talk with him on many subjects, and when he has done with his set questions (which, as with most people here, are meant to save them study) and has exhausted his sudden flashes of original ideas about *le lendemain de la révolution*[9] and so on, he begins to talk sense and more sense than the preliminary conversation led you to expect. Then you find that after all he has a largeness of view that is but too scarce here amongst the sectarians calling themselves Socialists. But as to unacquaintance with the world that is, as to hermit-like simplicity and *Fremdheit*[10] in the midst of the largest town of the world, an English *Stubengelehrter*[11] beats his German compeer hollow.

Paul's article on the *services publics* was very good.[12] It would do good in Germany too, where the Vierecks and Co. are only too eager to use '*Verstaatlichung*[13] in the same bamboozling way as Brousse and Co. the *services publics.*

Sunday evening all of a sudden Charley Rosher arrived—after ten. Had tricycled it—the hottest day of the season—from London; got to Haywards Heath (about 40 miles), done up, had to take the train. Next day diarrhoea and general breakdown. And on the following day, scarcely recovered, he had a telegram that his wife was ill and he was to return at once. A subsequent telegram informed us that she had had a 'Miss Carry'.

Nim was at first, while here, suffering from slight muscular rheumatism—pains all over, as poor Lizzie[14] used to say—but she is all right now and very jolly. So is Pumps and her two children. Percy has to spend most of the week in London. I am lazy and give way to it, as being the best thing under the circumstances to do. And here comes the whole brigade ready for dinner and the children want me to make them paper boats, so it's all up with writing and I close in haste.

Yours affectionately

F. Engels And love from all.