---
id: MECW48-110
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, May 9, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 May 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published in full, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collec"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE[1]

AT LE PERREUX

London, 9 May 1888

My dear Laura,

I have just finished, after many interruptions, a lengthy preface to the English edition of Mohr's discourse on Free Trade (Brussels 1848)[2] which is to come out in New York, and as this is the last piece of work which had to be done within a certain time I make use of my recovered liberty in order to write to you at once. And I have a rather important object too to write about, viz. that we want you here in London. You have planted, as I hear from Schorlemmer, some *Waldmeister*[3] in your garden, and as it will be utterly impossible for us to come over and use it there, there is nothing left but that you should come over and bring it here, when the other ingredients shall be duly and quickly found. The weather is beautiful, on Saturday,[4] Mohr's birthday, Nim and I went to Highgate, and today we have been on Hampstead Heath, I am writing with both windows open, and by the time you come which I hope will be next week we shall have lilacs and laburnums ready to receive you. If you only say by return that you are willing to come, *je me charge du reste*[5] Moreover you will by this time have brought your country-house and garden to such a state of perfection that you can leave it in charge of Paul who must be by now an accomplished gardener. Nim has been sighing for Löhr for some time past, and surely you ought to be present at Edward's great dramatic triumph on the 5 of June when his dramati- sation of N. Hawthorne's *Scarlet Letter* is to be brought out at a matinée. And I need not add that I want you here as much as anybody else. There are moreover so many other reasons for your coming that I must refrain from stating them here for fear of missing the post and killing you with ennui. So make up your mind at once, and say you will.

Of Edward's remarkable preliminary successes in the dramatic line you will have heard. He has sold about half a dozen or more pieces which he had quietly manufactured; some have been played in the provinces with success, some he has brought here himself with Tussy at small entertainments, and they have taken very much with the people that are most interested in them, viz. with such actors and impresarios as will bring them out. If he has now one marked success in London, he is a made man in this line and will soon be out of all difficulties. And I don't see why he should not, he seems to have a remarkable knack of giving to London what London requires.

Paul's letter in the *Intransigeant*[6] was very good indeed. He managed to hit the Radicals[7] without the slightest concession to Boulangism[8] and with the demand for general armament, put a spoke in both their wheels. It was done with great tact.

Have you heard that Fritz Beust is engaged—to an Italian-Swiss girl from Castasegna, hard on the border of Lombardy. I don't know who she is, we shall soon hear from our Zurich friends,[9] who are expected here in less than a fortnight. Maybe you will see Bernstein in Paris on his journey; he may be there any day. How they are going to manage here with regard to the paper[10] I am curious to see.[11] For many reasons London is not the best place for it, though perhaps the only one now. However we shall see, and generally things do settle down at their natural level.

Paul's 'Victor Hugo' in the *Neue Zeit* is very good. I wonder what they would say in France if they could read it.

The great Stead is off to Petersburg to interview the Czar[12] and to make him tell the truth about peace or war. I sent you his Paris inter- views,[13] profound man left Paris exactly as wise as when he came there. The Russians will soft-sawder him to his heart's content, I am afraid he will return from Petersburg a greater ass than what he is now. Perhaps in tonight's paper we may read that he has fathomed Bismarck.

The Romanians are queer people. I wrote to Nadejde in Jassy a letter[14] in which I tried to work them up in the anti-Russian line. Now the Jassy Marxists are quarrelling with the Bucharest Anarchists on account of the peasant revolt[15] stirred up by Russia, and so they translate and print my letter at once![16] This time I am not sorry, but it shows what indiscreet fellows they are.

Not only the paper is at an end, but time too—5.20 p.m. and Nim will ring directly, and in ten minutes the post closes. So farewell for today and do say you come!

Affectionately yours,

F. Engels