---
id: MECW48-148
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, November 24, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 November 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published in full, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 and, in Russian, in *Istorichesky arkhiv,* No. 2, 1956 Publis"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE[1]

AT LE PERREUX

London, 24 November 1888

My dear Laura,

I was going to write two lines to Paul just when your letter[2] arrived. I have been busy with a very important chapter in Book III[3] which I have had to re-write entirely, the materials left by Mohr being all in the rought, and as it is a mathematical one, it required much attention.[4]

And when one has only two daily fragments of IV2 hours each allowed for work by the doctor, a thing which otherwise could be settled in 14 days takes more than 6 weeks—and so I determined to do it all before I allowed myself any interruption for correspondence. Well, the main portion is finished to-day and so I can just send a line to ask Paul to let me know as usual when he wants any money and I will do what I can.

As soon as my chapter is definitely got rid of, I shall write again—I have such a lot of letter-debts!—in the meantime hope to get the *Figaro* to-night, so far it has not come. The position in France seems indeed very curious—our friends have allowed themselves by their hatred of the Radicals[5] to take Boulanger too little *au sérieux* and find now that he is a real danger[6] —anyhow he has the lower ranks of the army on his side and that is a power not to be disdained. And anyhow the way the fellow not only accepts but courts the support of the monarchists makes him more contemptible in my eyes than even the Radicals. Let us hope that the conscious breaches of logic committed by all parties—but then one must not forget that the form of all unconscious development is the *Negation der Negation,*[7] the movement by contrasts, and that this in France means Republicanism (or respectively Socialism) and Bonapartism (or Boulangism). And Boulanger's *avènement*[8] would be a European war—the very thing most to be feared.

Ever yours

F. Engels

Pumps' boy has had to be transformed into a Jew last Wednesday—let Paul pronounce his blessing on his favourite operation![9] He is getting better. Nim had a severe cold, home-bound nearly 3 weeks.