---
id: MECW48-015
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, March 10, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 March 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 10 March 1887

Dear Sorge,

Postcard of the 22nd and letter of the 25th of February received. You guessed rightly. It would have been useless to send a copy of the long letter, since the wording of the complaints in the Executive's circular is not only milder but differs materially, while everything else up till now has been private tittle-tattle. The way people in Europe view the affair is evident from Singer's reply to the circular sent him by Aveling.'[1]It's the old story though it's a pity that the Avelings also have to suffer through it.'[2] I sent you 4 copies of this circular in English and 4 in German; no doubt you will have received them, as also my letter of about a week ago.[3]

*La* Wischnewetzky is incapable of translating the *Manifesto.* Only one person can do that, namely Sam Moore, and he is working on it at this moment; I already have the first section in ms.[4] In this connection, however, it should be remembered that the *Manifesto,* like virtually all the shorter items by Marx and myself, is still much too abstruse for America. The workers over there are only now entering the movement; they are still quite raw and, particularly as regards theory, tremendously backward, owing to their generally Anglo-Saxon and particularly American nature and upbringing—hence it is to practice that the lever must be directly applied and for this purpose entirely new literature is required. I have already suggested to *la* Wischnewetzky that she bring out separately a popular digest of the main points in *Capital* in the form of short pamphlets.[5] Once the chaps are more or less on the right path, the *Manifesto* cannot fail to make an impact; just now the impact will only be felt by a few.

Your remarks about *Das Kapital* in English have been passed on to the publisher[6][7] who came back with a very practical answer to the effect that a favourable article in the *North American Review* would be enough to create a demand for an American edition and, for that reason, he would like to skim the cream off first. As it is, the thing is selling very well in America too; another big bookseller besides Bordollo has been ordering away merrily,[8] while sales over here have been so brisk that all but 50 copies of the first edition have been snapped up and the second—still at the same price—is printing. And this despite very little advertising and before any of the large papers mentioned it. The first serious review appeared in the *Athenaeum* of 5 March—very favourable.[9] The rest will now follow suit and help us sell the second edition, after which the cheap edition can doubtless come out.[10]

Irrespective of what the Socialist Labor Party may purport to be and however much it may take the credit for the successes achieved by the work of its predecessors, it is the only labour organisation in America which by and large stands on our basis, it is distributed in more than 70 sections over the whole of the North and West and as such, and only as such, have I recognised it. I have expressly stated that it is a party only in name.;[11] And I'm convinced that the gentlemen of the Executive were very disappointed by my preface[12] and would rather have done without it. After all, they themselves belong to the school of which I have said that it will ruin the party if it gains the upper hand. And they seem to be intent on doing so. In *Justice* here, Rosenberg has attacked the Knights of Labor on account of the longshoremen's strike[13] though he may not be altogether wrong about individual facts, he shows insufficient awareness of the course the movement is taking, a course that will quickly destroy the party if these chaps remain in control. It is precisely the follies of the place-seeking leaders of the Knights of Labor and their inevitable conflicts with the Central Labor Unions[14] in the big cities of the East that must provoke a crisis within the Knights of Labor and bring it to a head. But the blockhead doesn't see it.

Over here the unemployed agitation by the Social Democratic Federation[15] has also proved to be a complete flop; the church parade in St Paul's was a silly attempt to ape the Chartists and was likewise a flop,[16] in short nothing has happened yet. Next autumn things may get better; It would be desirable if, in the meanwhile, the rascals at the head of the *Social Democratic Federation* were to fade away and disappear.

Your

F. E.