---
id: MECW48-029
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, May 4, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 May 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906, and in full "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE[1]

IN HOBOKEN

London, 4 May 1887

Dear Sorge,

I trust you are feeling better and that your fears about becoming quite incapable of writing will not be realised. I too have found writing difficult; since the New Year I have had chronic ophthalmia, which has greatly restricted my reading and particularly my writing. Next week I shall be consulting one of the leading ophthalmologists here.

What you say about the New York louts in your letter of 20 April last[2] is certainly quite right, but you mustn't forget that I can only answer the points you yourself raise, not those about which you say nothing.

The *Manifesto* has been translated, and only these damned eyes of mine are preventing me from going through it. In my desk I have one French, one Italian and one Danish ms. which are also waiting to be gone through![3] Besides, you were Germans 40 years ago, with a German sense of theory, and that was why the *Manifesto* was effective, whereas it had no effect at all on other peoples, although it had been translated into French, English, Flemish, Danish, etc. And for the untheoretical, matter of fact Americans different, plainer fare will, I believe, be more wholesome, since we took part in the events depicted in the *Manifesto* while they did not.

As to my book,[4] the business has been well and truly bungled by *la* Wischnewetzky, who gave Miss Foster *plein pouvoir*[5] which Miss Foster then gave to the Executive.[6] —I immediately protested, but the thing had been done. Up till now *la* Wischnewetzky has bungled everything she has laid her hands on and I'll never give her anything again; she can do as she pleases and I shall be happy if she accomplishes something, but I've had enough and she must leave me in peace in the future. I replied to her last letter a week ago today.[7]

At Liebknecht's request I have sent him the copy of the circular you sent me, but on condition he returns it. He has promised to send the necessary piece for publication.[8]

Aveling is doing famously with his agitation in the East End of London.[9] The American example is proving a draw there and the Radical Clubs—which the Liberals have to thank for their 12 seats out of 69 in London—have approached him about lectures on the American movement and he and Tussy are hard at work. The immediate intention is to found an English labour party with an independent class programme. This would, if all went well, push both the Social Democratic Federation[10] and the Socialist League[11] into the background, which would be the best way of resolving the impending rows. Hyndman knows that it is a matter of life or death to him, especially as he has made enemies of nearly all his people. He has therefore taken up in *Justice* the Executive's charge against Aveling.[12] This is just as well, as it will put an end to the backbiting, while Aveling will have an opportunity to air the matter in public. At Whitsuntide the attitude of the Socialist League will also be clarified, I hope; the Anarchists must be chucked out, or the whole business will be ruined.[13]

The Avelings arranged to send you *Time* with their articles on America. I imagine you must have got them (March, April, May numbers).[14] Even the Tory *Standard* praises them! At the moment the Avelings are doing more and to much better effect than anyone else over here and yet I'm supposed to reply to Mother Wischnewetzky about her childish misgivings over the grave charge under which Dr Aveling will stand until he has disproved the circular of the Executive! Surrounded as she is by her tongue-wagging German sisters, Madame has evidently lost sight of the fact that it is not for Aveling *to disprove* but rather for the Executive *to prove.* *Commonweal, Gleichheit* and *To-Day* are going off to you by today's steamer. You will be amused by De Paepe's tall stories in *Gleichheit* about the Belgian socialists.[15] The movement over there is doing very well, now that the Flemings and the Ghent people have taken matters out of the hands of the Walloons and the Brussels people respectively, but the little chap can't stop telling tall stories. The funniest thing about it is that, whereas the Brussels people would like to found a new International in which *they* would be the General Council, Powderly has suggested that they join the Knights of Labor.[16] So it's Pope Powderly competing against Pope De Paepe!

This comes with my best wishes and my hopes for your speedy recovery. Yesterday the Avelings and I were in America, i.e. in Buffalo Bill's camp[17] —very nice.

Your

F. Engels