---
id: MECW48-090
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, February 7, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "7 February 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published in English in Frederick Engels, Paul and Laura Lafargue. *Correspondence. 1887-1890,* Vol. 2, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1960 First published, in the language of the o"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 7 February 1888

My dear Lafargue,

Herewith the cheque for LI5. I am overwhelmed with work. The business of the English *Manifesto* has at last been rushed through and I expect to have the proofs in a few days' time.[1] I am counting on Laura for improvements to the transla- tion, my own revision having had to be done in something of a hurry, and this would be of the greatest help to me in the event of a reprint.

Then, I am writing a critique of Bismarck's policy generally. It is to appear as an appendix to the *Anti-DUhring's Theory of Force,* or rather, as its application to current practice. I promised to deliver the ms. on the

20th of this month and, as you can well imagine, the thing has got to be carefully considered and reconsidered. Now, that is something that would have done nicely for the *Socialiste* had you not killed it off just by this time.

The disappearance of the *Socialiste* spells your own disappearance *qua* party from the Paris scene.[2] After all, the Possibilists manage to keep the *Prolétariat* going and, if you cannot do as much, it means you are contracting instead of expanding; it is not the *weekly* organ that is to blame—the other's a weekly too. Meanwhile I refuse to believe that the Paris workingman has embarked irretrievably on a period of decadence. The French are unpredictable and capable of springing all manner of surprises. So I shall wait and see.

As for Bismarck he, no less than the Russian Panslavists[3] and French chauvinists, is playing with fire. The present situation suits him so long as a glimmer of life remains in old Lehmann (nickname for William,[4] as you doubtless know). Bismarck has every reason to make himself indis- pensable against the day the old man dies. He and young William[5] have hatched something of a plot against the Crown Prince[6] in an attempt to induce him to have a laryngotomy, i.e. to have his throat slit.[7] Since the Crown Prince and his wife[8] are perfectly well aware of this, Bismarck has made himself all but impossible so far as they are concerned. And that's one of the reasons why the new Anti-Socialist Law has failed to get through the Reichstag.[9] A Catholic from Cologne[10] declared in open session that, before 30 September (when the existing law expires) the ministry might well have changed hands.

That debate on the Anti-Socialist Law was, for us, a real masterpiece. It is the first time our men have scored an out-and-out victory in the Reichstag. The law will be extended for two years, probably for the last time. But not all the arguments nor all the facts in the world would have sufficed to bring about the rejection of the government's demands had there been any immediate prospect of young William's succession; he is your true Prussian, insolent and arrogant as the officers in Berlin in 1806, who would use the steps of the French embassy to whet their swords on only, vanquished, to surrender those swords to Napoleon's soldiers two months later.[11]

The possibility of war led me to embark once again on the study of things military. If there isn't a war, so much the better. But if it does break out—and this depends on all manner of imponderable events—I hope that the Russians will be well and truly trounced and that nothing very decisive will happen on the French border—for then there might be a chance of reconciliation. With five million Germans under arms, called upon to fight for things of no concern to themselves, Bismarck would no longer have the upper hand.

In the meantime I am taking care of my eyesight which is improving under the treatment prescribed by my specialist, although he hasn't yet butchered my tear duct. But I have to spare my eyes.

My love to Laura.

Yours ever,

F. E.