---
id: MECW48-198
title: "Letter to Conrad Schmidt, June 12, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 June 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in *Sozialistische Monatshefte,* No. 17, 1920 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO CONRAD SCHMIDT

IN BERLIN

London, 12 June 1889

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

A thousand apologies for having been so thoroughly remiss in answering the inquiry in your esteemed letter of 15 April.[1] Contrary to my intentions I have got involved in the debate over the international congress and have thus taken upon myself a great deal of work, corre- spondence, running about, etc., which unfortunately has meant my neglecting a mass of other things, among them many letters, which remain unanswered.

So as not to keep you waiting a moment longer, I must inform you that I have not seen the pamphlet in question[2] since the time it appeared in Cologne, nor, to my knowledge, is there a copy among Marx's papers. The pamphlet came out shortly before the trial began and I have never heard of a second part. Something of that kind would probably have been advertised in the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* but all I can find there is the announcement, which first appeared on 9 July 1848, of this one pamphlet, described as Part I; the proceedings began on 5 August. There are no advertisements for a second part in the intervening numbers and I feel sure it never appeared. *After* his acquittal Lassalle would have had no cause to continue with a critique whose sole purpose had been to secure that acquittal.[3]

I am most anxious to see that piece of yours,^3 which has found a berth at last. I shan't be able to read the article on Kant in the *Vossische* until after the post has gone, so for the present I can do no more than say how very grateful I am to you for sending it.

If you join the *Vossische* and are required to belabour the East, the *Standard* is the only paper I would commend to your attention. Of all the London and, possibly, European, papers (a few in Hungary excepted), none is better informed on the East in so far as *Russia's* inter- ests are concerned. A day or two ago, for example, it was first with the news of Russia's little scheme, which has now re-emerged into the light of day, for a greater Serbian empire under the Prince of Montenegro—a little scheme whose furtherance has, for the present, been entrusted by the Russian government to the pan-Slav *Comité* so that, depending on circumstances, the former can either itself pursue it, or shelve it again for a while; 2., with the news of the secret agreement between Tsar[4] and Shah[5] whereby Persia would not grant railway, shipping, etc., conces- sions without Russia's approval and, in case of war, would place Khorassan at the Russians' disposal (i.e. make possible their strategic encirclement of Afghanistan). Months often go by without anything of this kind appearing in the *Standard,* but then the disclosures usually come thick and fast. The *Standard* is supplied with the stuff by Russophobes in the Conservative Party, the army and the Indian Civil Service.

I fear that, once Russia has fixed up the conversion of her debt[6] and acquired thereby a financial status she has never enjoyed before, the pan- Slav party on the one hand and, on the other, the need to provide employment for the army (whose younger, *educated* officers are without exception constitutionalists,[7] hence far in advance of the Prussians), thus keeping its mind off political conspiracies, will precipitate the Russian government into war. What will happen then, no one can tell; the old oracle of Delphi comes to mind: Croesus by crossing the Halys will ruin a mighty realm.

In any event much will be destroyed in the process, including, perhaps, the German army, provided a certain conceited young rascal[8] is given a bit of time to disorganise it.

Meanwhile there has also been the splendid business of the coalminers' strike,[9] which illuminated the whole situation like a flash of lightning. That's three army corps that have come over to us. So until my next and with best wishes,

Yours sincerely,

F. Engels