---
id: MECW48-185
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, May 11, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 May 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F A. Sorge und Anders,* Stuttgart, 1906 Published in English in full for t"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 11 May 1889

Dear Sorge,

There's so much writing and running about to be done in connnection with the damned congress that I hardly have any time left for other matters. It's the devil of a job—nothing but misunderstandings, rows and vexation all round, and in the end there'll be nothing to show for it.

The Hague Conference people[1] allowed the Belgians to make fools of them. Instead of at once proceeding, as had been decided after the Possibilists'[2] refusal, to protest and convoke a rival congress (which ought to have been done jointly by the Swiss and Belgians), the Belgians did nothing, obstinately refused to answer any letters and ended up by trotting out the lame excuse that they had got to submit the matter to their national congress—21/22 April[3] —! Whereupon the others did nothing whatever (because, through the Swiss, Liebknecht was intrigu- ing with some of the Possibilists since it was he who must succeed in bringing about an understanding), and thus the Possibilists captured all the publicity with their proclamations while our chaps either remained silent or, when asked about the possibility of a rival congress by such Englishmen as were still wavering, returned nothing but non-committal answers. The ultimate outcome of this cunning policy was that even in Germany our people turned rebellious, and Auer and Schippel demanded that delegates be sent to the Possibilist congress.[4] This finally opened Liebknecht's eyes for him and, after I and Ede Bernstein had told the French they were now at liberty to convoke their congress, also on the 14th of July[5] as originally intended, he wrote and told them exactly the same thing. And so the French have got their way, but are rightly cursing Liebknecht's procrastination and general jiggery-pokery, the blame for which they are laying on the Germans as a whole.

In this country, however, it is we who are having to suffer worst from Liebknecht's clever-clever goings-on. Our pamphlet[6] had struck home like a thunderbolt and shown up Hyndman & Co. for the liars and cheats they are; everything was in our favour and, if Liebknecht had been prompt to act vis-à-vis the Belgians, as he damned well ought to have done, or else had let them go hang and *himself negotiated* with the others, either convoking, or getting the French to convoke, the congress at some definite date, we should have won over the masses, and the Social Democratic Federation[7] would have deserted Hyndman. But as it was, we were fobbed off with assurances and told to wait; and, since the chief bone of contention in the Trades Unions here was whether to comply with the leaders' wishes and not send delegates to the congress or whether to defy them and send delegates regardless—the quality of the congress being of secondary importance and their sole concern, entry or non-entry into the international movement—it was clear that the chaps would join forces with those who know their own minds rather than with those who didn't. And thus we lost a splendid position we had only just won, nor, unless some miracle happens, will any Englishman of note attend our congress.

Bernstein was here just now and has held me up until posting time, so I must close.

Wischnewetzky[8] hasn't been to see me. Don't know what these people are after.

Your

F.E.