---
id: MECW48-189
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, May 16, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 May 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published (without supplement) in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 16 May 1889

My dear Lafargue,

Herewith my notes on your draft appeal,[1] which I have discussed with Bernstein. If, by the bye, you say that the Troyes[2] congress represented the whole of the French working class you are putting yourselves in flagrant contradiction to the facts and laying yourselves open to protests and refusals from abroad—and quite needlessly at that. Your dicta will not cause the Possibilists and their Paris majority to vanish into thin air.

I have sent out the English circular to the weekly papers, tomorrow it will go to the daily press, to the London radical clubs,[3] to Socialist organisations and to such influential people as may be interested.

This will account for perhaps 1,000 copies, Tussy will dispose of 500 others and Keir Hardie of another 500 in Scotland. The addresses and wrappers are ready, and everything will go off tomorrow so that by Saturday evening, when the clubs, Trade Unions, etc., meet, all will have been distributed.

Bonnier's letter is in the *Star*.[4]

Clara Zetkin[5] has written an excellent article in the Berlin *Tribune*—had we had so exact an account of things three months ago, it would have helped us a great deal. Bernstein will make good use of it when he goes to see Massingham tomorrow, as also of the affair of the 13th[6] whose significance was not apparent from the *Egalité* article, but all the details of which she has given to Bernstein.

You are quite right not to locate the National Council in Paris—since your strength lies in the provinces, it is there rather than in Paris that the official leadership belongs. That the provinces should be better than Paris is, moreover, a very good sign.

Tomorrow will see the first performance of another of Aveling's plays.[7] Although he has not taken the public by storm, he is attracting the notice of some critics, even those who have hitherto adhered to the conspiracy of silence.

The miners' strike in my part of Germany (Barmen lies some five or six miles from the edge of the coal-field) is an event of the very greatest significance.[8] Whatever the outcome, it will open up territory hitherto closed to us and, as of now, will earn us 40,000-50,000 more votes in the elections. The government is scared stiff, for any attempt at resolute action or, as they say in Prussia (although the term is an Austrian one), '**schneidiges Handeln'**[9] might precipitate a week of bloodshed, as happened in Paris in 1872. Henceforward the miners will be ours throughout the length and breadth of Germany—and they are a force to be reckoned with.

As for Boulanger, I hope you are right and that that mountebank has lost the game.[10] But...

*POST-TIME!*

Yours ever,

F. E.

I shall write to Danielson[11]

International Socialist Working Men's Congress.

14th to 21st July, 1889.

Workers and Socialists of Europe and America,—

The Bordeaux[12] Working Men's Congress, held by the delegates of upwards of 200 trades unions from all the industrial centres of France,[13]

and the Troyes[14] Congress, constituted by the delegates of 300 workmen's and[15] Socialist groups representing the French working class and revolutionary Socialism at large, have resolved to convene an International Congress in Paris, during the Exhibition, that shall be open to the workers of the whole world.

This resolution has been joyfully welcomed by the Socialists of Europe and America, happy to be able to meet and to clearly formulate the demands of the working-class on the subject of international labour legislation, which question will be treated at the Berne Conference, to be held by the representatives of the Governments of Europe in September.

The capitalists invite the rich and mighty to the Universal Exhibition, to contemplate and admire the achievements of the workers doomed to misery in the midst of the most colossal wealth ever possessed by any human society. We, Socialists, whose aim is the emancipation of labour, the abolition of wage-slavery, and the creation of an order of things in which all workers—without distinction of sex or nationality—shall have a right to the riches produced by their common toil; it is the producers whom we invite to meet us on the 14th July in Paris.

We call on them to seal the bond[16] of fellowship that, by consolidating the efforts of the proletariat of all countries, will hasten the advent of the new world.

'Working men of all countries, unite!'

—to *seal the bond* may give rise to difficulties. The Germans are forbidden to have any kind of organisation whatever and such as they have in defiance of the law is regarded as a secret society. Hence one must avoid any expression which suggests the idea of formal organisation. Bid them to a fête of solidarity, to a public demonstration of fraternity—anything you please, so long as you do not invite them to form an official organisation or *words to that effect,* as the English jurists say.

It also seems to me that one or two good sentences are needed to make an effective ending.

And you might tell the international Socialists who are going to sign this that the details of place of meeting, etc., will be communicated later by the Paris commission. A little prose after so much rhetoric would not come amiss. It would be more businesslike.