---
id: MECW48-042
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, June 11, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 June 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in English for the first time i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE[1]

IN PARIS

London, 11 June 1887

My dear Laura,

Mother Schack has had her punishment. Yesterday Tussy and Edward went to the Kautskys, with whom she lives. Found her in. She refused to see Edward. Tussy and Mrs Kautsky went in to her bedroom. Interpellated as to what were the facts against Edward and what her proofs, she declined repeatedly to say anything. Tussy, after various severe hits, told her this refusal was a *Gemeinheit[2] * She: *das lasse ich mir von niemand sagen![3] *—Tussy: *Dann werden Sie sich es jetzt von mir noch einmal in Gegenwart von Louise Kautsky sagen lassen, dass es eine Gemeinheit ist, wenn Sie solche Anklagen vorbringen und nicht dafür einstehn.[4] * Upon which she bolted out of the room, leaving Tussy in possession of her own bedroom!

She even tried to get old Lessner to fall in with her slanders but got the worst of it. She also says Pumps is sat upon by Percy! All this comes out now at once, but it has had two good effects, it will make Edward see what his treating all that stuff with contempt leads to and will make him speak out about various matters about which he ought to have spoken in his own defence; and secondly it has helped the Kautskys out of their unfortunate position in the house with Scheu. They are going to leave and take a flat for themselves.

I don't know whether I told you she had Mother Besant to tea the other day and said in her presence that *all* our deputies, Bebel, Liebknecht, Singer and all were corrupt. Kautsky jumped up and put his fist under her nose, he was in such a rage. If it had not been for her staying with them, we should have shaken her off long ago.

Schorlemmer is still here, doing business as Vice-President of Chemical Section at British Association meeting, Manchester, next August.[5] He, Nim, and Pumps had a long conversation this morning, planning a trip to Paris in September. *Châteaux en Espagne[6] * so far. He sends his kindest regards to both of you.

Affectionately yours

F. Engels