---
id: MECW48-014
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, March 3, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 March 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE[1]

IN HOBOKEN

London, 3 March 1887

Dear Sorge,

I am sending off simultaneously with this a package containing 1 *Commonweal,* 1 *To-Day,* 3 *Gleichheits* and 4 copies in German, 4 copies in English of Aveling's second circular.[2]

The Executive over there is going to the most amazing lengths to obtain approval for its puerile action against Aveling. You will see from Aveling's circular (no doubt you will also have had a look at that of the Executive) what they tried on with the sections. But since then, and without waiting for the sections' vote, they have handed over the whole business to the Board of Supervisors in the hope that the latter may get them out of the soup. Aveling, of course, is also taking it up with the Board of Supervisors, to which he is now sending all the documents, and we shall see how things turn out.

The Executive is wisely confining itself to the age-old and, to German expatriates, eternally new story of squandering the workers' pence; so presumably the additional charges of attempted embezzlement, etc., are only being disseminated in private. No doubt you will find some opportunity of putting the circulars to use.

We have good reason to be satisfied with the elections in Germany.[3]

The increase in the number of votes is marvellous, especially considering how much pressure is being exerted not only by the government but also by the industrialists who, wherever feasible, presented the workers with the choice either of being dismissed or of voting compulsorily for a Bismarckian. I fear this will again be in evidence in the second ballot, the results of which are not yet known over here. The Pope[4] is forbidding Catholics to vote for us, the men of Progress[5] voluntarily prefer a Bismarckian to a Socialist, while the industrialists exercise outright coercion—so if in these circumstances we capture one or two more seats it will be a victory truly won.[6] But it's not the number of seats that matter, only the statistical demonstration of the party's irresistible growth.

You suggest that our people have made fools of themselves in electing such men as Geiser, Frohme, Viereck, etc. There's no alternative. They have to take the candidates as and where they find them. That is a fate shared by all workers' parties in parliaments where there is no remuneration. Nor does it matter. The chaps are under no illusion regarding their representatives; of this the best proof is the total defeat of the 'parliamentary group' in its trial of strength with the *Sozialdemokrat.*[7] And the deputies are well aware of it; the gentlemen of the right wing know that, if they are still tolerated, it is only by reason of the Anti-Socialist Law[8] and that they will instantly be thrown out on the day the party regains its freedom of movement. Even then, all will be by no means well with the representation but I think I'd rather see the party superior to its parliamentary heroes than the other way round.

Nor need you worry about Liebknecht. They realise perfectly well what he's like in Germany. I have seldom known a man about whom the opinions of the most diverse people are so closely agreed as they are about Liebknecht. While he imagines he's got them all eating out of his hand, they are sizing him up quite critically. His incorrigible optimism, particularly about anything in which he himself has a hand, his firm belief that he is the life and soul of the movement, the chap who does everything and manages everything for the best and that it's only the other 'jackasses' who spoil things, his urge to create order everywhere and to cover up all contradictions by resolving them into commonplaces, his yearning for outward and momentary successes, even at the expense of enduring losses—all this is very well known. But our people also know that all these failings are only the obverse of most valuable qualities and that without those foibles he simply could not achieve what he does in fact achieve. So long as he has Bebel at his side he won't perpetrate any serious blunders although he may cause a lot of unnecessary trouble and strife. And when it comes to parting from the philistines, he will defend them up to the very last, but at the crucial moment will be found in the right place.

I hope that your health will improve with the coming of spring.

Your

F. E.