---
id: MECW48-142
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, October 10, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 October 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and, in full,"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE[1]

IN HOBOKEN

London, 10 October 1888

Dear Sorge,

We finally got back here last Saturday week[2] and since then I have sent off to you 2 *To-Days* and a pile of *Commonweals* and today a pile of *Gleichheits* as well as 2 more *Commonweals.* One *Gleichheit* is miss- ing. Ede Bernstein took it and I haven't got it back yet.

Little has changed over here; the next No. of the *Sozialdemokrat* will be printed in this country.[3] Otherwise nothing at all seems to have happened.

The *City of New York* is a humbug; in a calm sea she is steady, of course, but once she starts rolling, no one can do anything to stop her. Moreover, her engines are in a deplorable state; one of them was operat- ing at barely half power, while the other threatened to break down at any moment because of the excessive strain. We never did more than 370 sea miles in a day and once it was only 313.

In so far as the political situation makes a survey possible, the esti- mate we formed of it over there was quite right. Bismarck has gone on for so long spinning silly young William[4] the yarn that he's a greater version of old Fritz[5] that the lad is now taking it seriously and wants to be 'Emperor and Chancellor in one person'. Bismarck is presently letting him have his way in order that he may make a thorough ass of himself, whereupon Bismarck will step into the breach as his guardian angel. Meanwhile he has assigned his Herbert[6] to the insolent lad as spy and custodian. A row between the two will not be long in coming and then the fun will begin.

In France the Radicals;[7] in the government are making bigger asses of themselves than one could have hoped for. They have renounced the whole of their old programme vis-à-vis the workers and are behaving like out and out Opportunists[8] they are pulling the chestnuts out of the fire for the Opportunists and doing their dirty work for them. That would be quite splendid but for Boulanger and provided they weren't virtually forcing the masses into his arms.[9] As a person the man is not particularly dangerous but his popularity among the masses is driving the entire army over to the his side and that constitutes a grave danger— the temporary ascendancy of the said adventurer and, by way of an escape from his predicament, war.

So Jonas has wriggled quite cleverly out of it after all and faked an interview I can't very well disclaim.[10]

Mother Wischnewetzky is furious because I 'spent 10 days in New York and didn't find the time to make the two hours easy railway journey to her home. There was really so much she wanted to talk to me about'. All very well if I hadn't caught a cold and been plagued with indigestion and if I had had 10 consecutive days in New York in the first place.

Warm regards to your wife.[11]

Your old friend,

F. Engels