---
id: MECW48-224
title: "Letter to Max Hildebrand, October 22, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 October 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Pod znamenem marksizma,* No. 6, 1927. A fragment from this letter was first published in English in the collection Marx K., Engels E, Lenin V. L, Anarchism and Anarcho"
status: raw
---

MECW Note : Hildebrand, Max - schoolteacher in Berlin, adherent of Max Stirner, collected biographical material about the latter.

TO MAX HILDEBRAND IN BERLIN

London, 22 October 1889 122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Sir,

In reply to your note of the 19th,)[1] I made Stirner's acquaintance around the beginning of 1842 in Berlin[2] when he was hobnobbing with E. Meyen, Buhl, Edgar and subsequently Bruno Bauer, etc. It is true that his name was Schmidt; he owed the nickname of Stirner[3] to his remarkably high forehead. He cannot have been hobnobbing with this circle for very long, since he didn't know Marx, who had left Berlin, if my memory is correct, less than a year previously[4] and was much respected by the others. He was, I think, no longer a grammar school master or at any rate ceased to be one shortly afterwards. Apart from the above named, others who used to meet together at that time were a certain von Leitner, an Austrian, K. F. Koppen, who taught at a grammar school and was a special friend of Marx's, Mussak, his colleague, Cornelius, the bookseller who appears in Fritz Reuter's *Festungstid,* Miigge, Dr J. Klein, the dramatist and dramaturgist, a certain Wachenhusen, Dr Zabel, subsequently editor of the *National-Zeitung,* Rutenberg who, however, left for Cologne shortly afterwards to join the first *Rheinische Zeitung,* a certain Waldeck[5] (not the jurist and high court counsellor[6] and others whose names escape me; there were in fact several groups which would meet and mingle depending on the time and the opportunity. Jungnitz, Szeliga and Faucher did not arrive until after November 1842, the month in which I completed my year of military service and left Berlin. We would meet at Stehely's and, in the evenings, at this or that Bavarian ale-house in Friedrichsstadt[7] or, if we were in funds, at a wineshop in the Poststrasse, which was Köppen's favourite haunt. I knew Stirner well and we were on *Du*[8] terms; he was a good sort, not nearly as bad as he makes himself out to be in his *Einzige*[9] and with a slight suggestion of pedantry that had clung to him since his teaching days. We discussed Hegelian philosophy a great deal; at that time he had made the discovery that Hegel's logic begins with an error. *Being,* which proves to be *Nothing* and thus becomes the antithesis of itself, cannot be the beginning; the beginning must consist in something which is itself already the immediate, spontaneously evolved unity of Being and Nothing and from which alone that antithesis arises. And this, according to Stirner, was 'It' (*it* snows, *it* rains), something which is and which, at the same time, is Nothing. Later on he seems to have come round to the realisation that there was, after all, nothing in It, any more than in Being and Nothing.

I saw less of Stirner during the latter part of my time in Berlin; no doubt he was even then pursuing the lines of reasoning that resulted in his magnum opus. By the time it came out, our views had already diverged a great deal; the two years I had spent in Manchester had left their mark on me.[10] When, later on in Brussels,[11] Marx and I felt it necessary to join issue with the offshoots of the Hegelian school, we criticised Stirner amongst others—the critique is as bulky as the book itself. The ms.,[12] which has never been published, is still here in my house in so far as it hasn't been eaten by mice.

Stirner enjoyed a revival thanks to Bakunin who, by the way, was also in Berlin at the time and, during Werder's course of lectures on logic (1841-42), sat on the bench in front of me along with four or five other Russians. Proudhon's harmless, purely etymological anarchy (i.e. absence of government) would never have resulted in the present anarchist doctrines had not Bakunin laced it with a good measure of Stirnerian 'rebellion'.[13] As a result the anarchists have themselves become nothing but a collection of 'Unique Ones', so much so that no two of them can abide one another's company.

For the rest I know nothing about Stirner; I never found out what subsequently befell him, except that Marx told me he had almost literally starved to death; where he got this from, I don't know.

I saw his wife[14] in this country on one occasion; while here she took up with - *ah que j'aime le militaire*[15] - ex-Lieutenant Techow and, if I'm not mistaken, accompanied him to Australia.

If I have time later on I might well write a sketch of that period, which was most interesting in its way.[16]

Yours most respectfully,

F. Engels