---
id: MECW48-018
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, March 16, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 March 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Job. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 16 March 1887

Dear Sorge,

Very many thanks for your letters of 28 February and 2 March along with enclosures, and also for all the trouble you have taken. I return herewith the Executive's circular[1] as we have got a copy. Concerning the *Volkszeitung's* article (so the charming Jonas had suppressed Aveling's answer for a whole month before deciding to print it), we promptly sent Jonas the enclosed reply today. Should he not print it and if you could then put some sort of pressure on him, that would be splen- did.[2] But his article does seem to indicate a partial retraction.

The great controversy over the dubious *items* in Aveling's accounts will no doubt have now been resolved by our circular of 26 February.[3]

Nevertheless it is strange that people should make a fuss about details such as these which cannot possibly be understood except in context— that these people haven't said to themselves that they ought first to hear what the other side has to say about that context before permitting themselves to pass judgment. Every one of these items would also have appeared in Liebknecht's accounts if he had ever submitted any. But

what he said was this: the party must meet all my expenses and I shan't put down anything at all. And with that they were satisfied. The fact that Aveling subsequently met virtually all the expenses incurred, e.g. in Boston, not only by Liebknecht, but also by his daughter,[4] is not mentioned by the Executive, although these are shown in the accounts and we were decent enough not to put it in the circular. Thus, during the time they were travelling together, Liebknecht ordered all their wine, etc., to be sent up to Aveling's room and hence charged to Aveling's account. The Executive knows all about it and is keeping it dark. But shabbiest of all is their failure to send us their circular, released over there on *7 January,* until *3 February,* so that they had a clear month in which to spread their slanderous stories at their leisure before we so much as discovered what Aveling was actually accused of.

Pending further information, I don't believe that the resolution was accepted by the majority of the sections. If I am to go by what Aveling and Tussy say, the Knights of Labor[5] attitude is directly opposed to the views of all the sections in the West. And if this should nevertheless prove to be the case, the whole 'party' can go to the devil.

It is truly fortunate that you should send me the *Sozialist.* Hitherto I have been able to pass on my second copy, which I get from the Executive, to Kautsky or the Avelings, so that it has been turned to good account. This week no paper has arrived from those charming people, from which I can only conclude that the next Nos will contain more scurrilities about Aveling.

A letter has been sent to Müller in St Paul asking him if he would also publish the 2nd circular of 26 February.[6] While the Executive, covertly, as is its wont, makes the most of every journalistic ploy, it evidently intends to push the responsibilities onto Aveling should he himself be the first to go into print.

To us over here it seemed quite natural that Aveling should not reply to the *New York Herald.* The article was quite abysmally absurd, on top of which they both say that it is not the custom in America to reply seri- ously to such tomfooleries. From my own knowledge of the *Herald* it is most unlikely that the paper would have accepted it. And when the arti- cle was reprinted over here, Aveling replied at once.[7] But even if Aveling had replied to the *Herald* article, *how would that have helped him vis- à-vis the Executive}* It sounds to me like a lame excuse by Shevich. All in all I'm surprised at the utter spinelessness of most of the people in

New York as revealed by this affair. The Executive spreads whopping lies and everyone believes them—from Jonas to Shevich and the Wischnewetzky's! So the Executive would appear to be a great author- ity in New York after all.

No more time now, alas, to send you various newspapers today; they will leave tomorrow—post about to go,

Your

F. E.