---
id: MECW48-128
title: "Letter to Hermann Engels, August 9, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 August 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published in *Deutsche Revue,* Jg. 46, Bd. III, 1921 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

IN ENGELSKIRCHEN

SS *City of Berlin,* between

Liverpool and Queenstown,

9 August 1888

Dear Hermann,

I set sail yesterday on a quick trip to America[1] and just wanted to tell you as much before we leave the last European port. We are a merry party of four—myself, Prof. Schorlemmer of Manchester, Dr Aveling of London and his wife, Marx's youngest daughter. Schorlemmer and I shall be returning towards the end of September and expect to be back in England on 2/3 October. My being able to realise this long-standing plan this summer was most propitious and I had also been strongly advised on medical grounds to make the two longish voyages and get a complete change of air.

Our ship is much more beautiful than the Berlin ashore; she is nearly 6,000 tons and the Avelings came back from New York on her eighteen months ago. They know the captain, purser and crew, which is very nice. We have charming cabins, the fare is excellent and on top of that there is American lager beer, which is by no means bad, a long deck to rove about on and not too many passengers, provided a large number don't join us at Queenstown—in short, it all promises to be very pleasant. I am most eager to see the world on the other side; we shall be staying for 3 or 4 weeks, which is just long enough, I think.

We are nearing Queenstown, so I had better close. Mind you all keep well. I shall write to you again from the other side of the ocean. Regards to your wife and children[2] and all other relatives.

With much love from Your old Friedrich