---
id: MECW48-169
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, March 12, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 March 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in the language of the original (French), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Printed according to the original Translated from the French Published "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 12 March 1889

My dear Lafargue,

The Possibilists have behaved just as they should—both as regards themselves and as regards us.[1] I was afraid they would accept—with reservations which, though apparently insignificant, would have been enough to bedevil the whole issue. Fortunately they appear to be too much committed to the course already embarked upon—the financial exploitation of their position on the Municipal Council. This time they have dealt themselves the *coup de grâce.*

As for the Municipal Council's 50,000 frs, they will probably get them, you cannot prevent it. Let them use the money for their congress—what does it matter? Not all the money in the coffers of the Municipal Council of Paris would suffice to manufacture a socialist congress, except as a joke.[2]

The Germans have made concessions enough and are unlikely to make any more. The Dutch have been subjected to direct attack by the Possibilists, the Swiss and the Danes are following the German lead and the Belgians are divided, for while the Brussels people are, as you say, Possibilists at heart, the Flemings are very much better, and all that is wanted is to extricate them from the Brussels sphere of influence. Up till now they have left their foreign policy entirely in the hands of the Brussels people, but this time we may well see a change.

It is a great misfortune that you should be without a paper at this vital juncture. M. Roques is an idiot and is simply throwing his money down the drain. The present editors will cost him ten times the 35 frs a day on account of which he has let go the only editors who might have made a success of his paper.[3] But that does not alter the fact that this business has happened at the most inopportune moment.

If you have invited the League[4] to the conference without also inviting the Federation,[5] as I can only conclude from your letter,[6] it was a mistake on your part. Either both should have been invited, or both should have been left out. In the first place, the Federation is indubitably more important than the League and, in the second, it gives them an excuse to say that the whole conference has been arranged without their knowledge. Hyndman, face to face with all of you, couldn't have done the least harm—quite the contrary and, although he claims to represent the Possibilists over here in matters connected with the congress, he has not dared of late to stand up for them in his paper,[7] but rather has rapped them over the knuckles, if very gently. And Bernstein, who is aware of all this, would have kept him within decent limits. However, it was the Germans who were to convene the conference and, as always, Liebknecht acted—or refrained from action—in response to some passing whim.

I am forwarding your letter to Bernstein so that he can use it for the issue of the paper[8] due to appear on Thursday.[9] I must also send a letter to Liebknecht by this post and so will break off. I enclose herewith a cheque for £20, which I hope will relieve you of your difficulties for the time being.

Give Laura a kiss from me. I hope she has got rid of her cold.

Yours ever,

F.E.