---
id: MECW48-020
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, March 21, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "21 March 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE[1]

IN PARIS

London, 21 March 1887

My dear Laura,

I have received Fortin 's Ms.[2] which, I am afraid, will have to rest a bit in my drawer, as I must still nurse my eye. Of course the inflammation was merely symptomatic of the real affliction, a weakness brought on by over-exertion of the eye especially at night-time, and that can be cured by nothing but the removal of the cause; in consequence Nim and I pass our evenings now at card-playing and I find it acts, but has to be contin- ued yet a bit. If Paul continues his work at the Bibliothèque etc. in the usual way, I am afraid he will have to suffer for it, though of course his doctor ought to know.

To settle business first: I enclose cheque for £12, and further inform you that nothing has been heard here from Longuet. I sent him a post- card[3] about the copy of *Capital* addressed to *La Justice,* asking if he had got it; no reply either.

The *gifles*[4] - between the *Voie* and the *Cri* may amuse the Parisians but I should be very sorry to see our friends there sinking to the level of *saltimbanques at foires*[5] forcing themselves upon the attention of the public by quarrels and fights provoked for that purpose. If that will go down in Paris, it will certainly not anywhere else, and it is certainly not the way to raise our Parisian friends in the esteem of the working class out of France. I can conceive Goullé boxing Labruyère's ears while they had the *Voie* to give their own account of the affair,[6] but the repe- tition by Goullé and Deville after the paper was dead, and they had to take refuge in the *Radical,* seems to me utterly out of all common sense. The version of the *Cri* reaches all the foreign socialist papers; that of the *Radical* does not, unless forwarded express. And whether or not, this mode of settling disputes after the manner of the German *Knoten*[7] before 1848 will give foreigners a very poor idea of the lead- ers of French Socialism and makes one almost regret the duelling prac- tices of the Second Empire journalists, as being only ridiculous. The sooner the whole affair is forgotten, the better it will be for our people.[8]

Old William, if not actually dead, seems to be dying—*vide* enclosed cut from the *Weekly Dispatch.*[9] And the dynamite shells of St Petersburg seem after all not to have missed their aim. *Vide* the abject declaration which through Reuter (!!) the Russian government have sent round Europe.[10] The Czar[11] goes on his knees before revolution, and even the Russophile *Daily News*[12] says this abject document can be compared only to the abject telegram of Alexander Battenberg to the Czar.[13] This thing looks indeed like the beginning of the end in Russia, and that would be the beginning of the end in Europe too. What a fool that Czar must be! Not to see that when he ordered the plot to kidnap and, if necessary, to kill that poor ass Alexander Battenberg, he justified the same proceedings against himself, and called upon his own enemies to apply to him his own methods!

Pumps is expected back from Eastbourne to-morrow. Edward lectured yesterday morning—for the first time since his quinsy—in an East-End Radical Club;[14] he is making a very useful and probably successful campaign amongst the East-End Radicals to engage them to cut loose from the Great Liberal Party and form a Working Men's party after the American fashion. If he succeeds he will get both Socialist Associations[15] into his wake; for here he gets hold of the real spontaneous working men's organisations and gets at the heart of the working class. So far his prospects are good. Tussy and he are going to move this week into their new place in Chancery Lane but as they must clear out from 38 St George Square to-morrow, they will perhaps have to stay a few days with us.

Love from Nim.

Affectionately yours

F. Engels