---
id: MECW48-183
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, May 2, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "2 May 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in *La Nouvelle Revue Socialiste,* No. 21, 1928 Translated from the French Printed according to the original Published in English in: Frederick Engels, Paul and Laura Lafargue. *Corres"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE[1]

AT LE PERREUX

London, 2 May 1889

My dear Lafargue,

Now things are beginning to move. This is what Bebel writes:

'Liebknecht and I have agreed that Lafargue and his friends should be urged to convene a congress immediately for 14 July. This we are doing in the conviction that, once the two congresses have met on the same day, it will prove impossible for them to hold separate sessions, and that they will join forces, whether the Possibilists like it or not.

I think you people should now be satisfied. As soon as the convocation circular is published by the French, we shall issue an open appeal to the Germans, asking them to elect delegates to the congress and indicating the procedure by which this may be done' (under German law). 'I have written in the same vein to the Austrians, and the Danes and Swiss will likewise be notified. In this way we shall, I hope, manage to expropriate the Possibilists—or at any rate well and truly thwart their plan.'[2]

4.30 p.m. I am just back from Bernstein's who, however, was not at home. He has had a postcard from Liebknecht in which the latter says that you are at liberty to make use of 'their names' as having assented to your congress. 'Their names' presumably means Bebel and Liebknecht, for they are not as yet *officially* entitled to commit the German Party. I didn't see the card but Bonnier, who dropped in while I was out, told Nim about it.

I hope to get a few lines from you tomorrow morning which would enable me to rekindle Bebel's ardour by telling him that you are now taking action.

Don't forget, by the bye, to return to me, deciphered, the letter from Lyons.[3] I must not keep the workmen there waiting for an answer.

Now that you've got several provincial papers, choose one to be your *Monitor* for the duration of your congress and arrange for it to be sent to the various Parties, along with all your publications.[4] Below you will find some of the addresses. The rest will follow.

Give Laura a kiss from me. I shall write to her as soon as this bally congress ceases to monopolise my right hand.

Yours ever,

F. E.

A. Bebel, Hohestrasse 22, Dresden-Plauen, Germany
W. Liebknecht, Borsdorf-Leipzig, Germany
The Editor, *Socialdemokraten,* Römersgade 22, Copenhagen, Denmark
F. Domela Nieuwenhuis, 96 Malakkastraat, The Hague, Holland
The Editor, *Recht voor Allen,* Roggeveenstraat 54, The Hague
The Editor, *Arbejderen,* Nansensgade 28A, Copenhagen, Denmark
The Editor, *Gleichheit,* Gumpendorferstrasse 79, Vienna VI, Austria
The Editor, *Muncitoriul,* 38 Strada Sarariei, Jassy, Romania
The Editor, *Justice,* 181 Queen Victoria Street, London, E. C.
The Editor, *Labour Elector,* 13 Paternoster Row, London, E. C.
The Editor, *Commonweal,* 13 Farringdon Road, London, E. C.

A. Reichel, Barrister-at-law, Berne, Switzerland  } Hague
Henri Scherrer, Barrister-at-law, St Gall, Switzerland } delegates[5]

The Editor, *Sozialdemokrat,* 114 Kentish Town Road, London, N. W.
The Editor, *Volkszeitung,* Box 3560, New York City, U.S.A.
The Editor, *Sozialist,* 25 East 4th St., New York City, U.S.A.

(to be continued).

The (German)^3 Americans although pressed by the Possibilists and Hyndman have said that it is you they still favour, and not the Possibilists. If they get your circular in time, I have no doubt they will give their assent, but they will go to *some* congress or other. *Arbejderen* is the radical opposition paper run by Petersen (who was acquainted with Rouannet and Malon in Paris, but has changed greatly since then) and by Trier, translator of my *Origin of the Family.* For tactical reasons you would be well-advised not to send them anything that is not simultaneously dispatched to the *Socialdemokraten,* organ of the moderate majority.[6]

The address of P. Christensen, delegate to London (a good one)[7] is 9 Römersgade, Copenhagen.

Belgians: *Vooruit* (The Editor), Marché au fil, Ghent. Same address for Anseele (E.). At the Jolimont congress[8] the Ghent people declared that they would not attend the congress of the Possibilists so long as the latter persisted in their claims. The report in the *Prolétariat* is riddled with Possibilist lies.[9]