---
id: MECW48-102
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, April 10-11, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 April 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 37, Moscow 1965 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 10-11 April 1888

My dear Laura,

Schorlemmer returned to Manchester yesterday and so I can sit down today and write a few lines, that is to say if Edward and Tussy, who are returning from their 'Castle' and will be here about 5, do not drop in too soon.

First of all I must congratulate Paul on his splendid discoveries in etymology, which are truly astonishing.[1] That a great many French words which we used to derive from the Latin *bos* ox, are descended from the Greek *bous* ox, is already something. But that *bouillon* comes from *bous* and not from *bullire* to boil, is a great discovery and only pity that Paul did not follow it up a little further. Thus 5o«-strapa[2] is evidently of the same derivation, and 5«o-naparte (for 2?o«-naparte) also, and Bonapartism being thus connected with ox, *Bou-lznger* must be derived from *bous;* and then also its English equivalent *Baker,* which throws a completely new light on the adventure of Colonel Baker in the railway-carriage: how could he help rushing on Europa-Robinson, being descended from *bous* Jupiter?[3] Moreover there can be no doubt that in *mou-tarde* the *m* stands for an original *b,* and that thus its derivation from *bous* is assured—what a flood of light this throws on the fact that mustard is eaten to beef only and not to mutton!

Another great progress is to treat Sanskrit on the same level as craniology, and to have discovered *des linguistes d'Allemagne et d'Angleterre*[4] who say that *le finnois offre plus d'analogie avec les idiomes aryens que le sanscrit*.[5] I have only heard of some who, ascribing to the Aryan nations a *European* origin instead of an Asiatic one, find themselves placed before the awkward predicament of having to accept a Finnic origin of the Aryan language without being able, so far, to show the least trace of connection between the two. If Paul had tried to derive French from Japanese instead of from Greek, he would have done what he maintains these poor devils of Germans and English have done. They are badly off enough, as it is. They are second-rate and third-rate *epigones*—the Germans that is—some are even Bohemians—who for sensational purposes have started—or rather (by a series of mistakes) been conducted to—a paradox theory which has landed them in face of a dead wall; the Englishmen have taken the thing up as a fashion, as was to be expected from beginners who want to show off as masters—they have ventilated their rubbish at the last British Association[6] Meeting quite *en-famille*—but that which Paul ascribes to them—the discovery of the connection between Aryan and Finnish, a connection closer even than that of the other Aryan languages with Sanskrit their sister-tongue—that they are still panting for, and it is to be hoped they do not read the *Nouvelle Revue* or else they would indeed want to know who is this Fergus who holds the magic wand which transforms Aryan into Finnic and vice versa. But in case they come, Fergus can point to his Irish name in justification of his Irish Bulls or *bous.*

But joke *à part* the articles are very good, and what does it matter to the Parisians *qui s'en fichent*[7] whether Fergus tells them a few bulls about etymology. It is far more important that they should learn a little about their own language, and that they find here. Only I don't think it is necessary to the amusement of the Parisians that an author should commit himself by such assertions. But then we all of us have the inclination to brag most of what we know least; at all events I know I am.[8]

11th April. Exactly as I expected. The two hungry souls[9] dropped in just as I finished the preceding page, bringing eggs, butter, pork pie, sausages from their truly rural retreat, and two good appetites. Today I had my American mail-day and now try to finish this.

In France things seems to me to go very well. Boulangism is the just and deserved punishment for the cowardice of all parties in the face of that bourgeois chauvinism which thinks it can make the clock of universal history stand still until France has reconquered Alsace. Fortunately Boulanger proves himself more and more a political ass, more dangerous, in my opinion, to himself than to anybody else. *Un homme qui a son plan comme Trochu kann sich begraben lasssen*[10]

For the rest, the Opportunists[11] are getting more and more worn out, *verschlissen*[12] and have to fall back upon the alliance with the Monarchists, that is to say upon political suicide. The great progress in French public opinion is this: that the Republic is recognised as the only possible government, that Monarchy is equivalent to civil war and foreign war. The action of the Opportunists (besides their flagrant corruption) drives public opinion more and more towards the Left, and compels the nomination of more and more radical governments. All this in strict harmony with the regular development since 1875. We can wish for no more than that this should continue, and if Boulanger assists this move unintentionally all the better. The sense which the French have unbeknown to themselves—the necessary logical inheritance of a great, unconsciously logical history—will I hope prove more powerful than all the nonsense they set to work consciously and intentionally.

The German philistine convinces himself more and more that with old William[13] the *clef de voûte*[14] of the present system has gone, and that the whole *voûte*[15] will gradually follow. I only hope Bismarck will not be sent to the right-about merely in order to re-enter in triumph. Otherwise he had better stop.

What a fool that Rochefort is. Quotes Catholic Munich papers to prove that the Germans are only awaiting the French again invading Germany in order to join them, upset Bismarck and restore French domination in Germany! Cannot that idiot see that nothing would more fortify Bismarck than such a French attempt to 'free' Germany, and that we intend to settle our internal concerns ourselves!

Ever yours,

F. Engels
called by Dinner Bell