---
id: MECW48-074
title: "Letter to Conrad Schmidt, November 26, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "26 November 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published in *Sozialistische Monatshefte,* Nos. 15 and 16, 1920. Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO CONRAD SCHMIDT

IN KÖNIGSBERG

London, 26 November 1887

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Dr Schmidt,

I was delighted to hear from you again and to learn that you had left behind the fogs of London and the exuberant air of Paris and were back in the atmosphere of 'pure reason'. I had learned from the press about the strange adventures connected with the arrival of your crate of books[1] and imagined I was back again in those long-forgotten days when I myself was in Berlin, an occasional contributor to the *Hartungsche Zeitung,*[2] and when everything was banned save a 'narrow slave mentality'.[3] But no doubt there are even better things in store!

As regards Heine's letter, I cannot throw any definite light on it.[4]

Up till 1848 Lassalle cut no sort of political figure at all; he became known only as a result of the Hatzfeldt trial.[5] And in it both parties had recourse to all possible means, no matter what, provided they gave promise of success, and brought into play, whenever and however they thought fit, anyone who might conceivably be of use. On the other hand, the ban placed by the Federal Diet on Heine's books, even future ones, forced him to use all available methods of advertisement in order to ensure the sales that he would otherwise have automatically enjoyed. In the circumstances, Lassalle could become most useful to Heine; on the other hand, Heine was impressed by his energy, ruthlessness and knowledge of the world—all things rare in the majority of young Germans then as they are today.

So it is more than probable that Lassalle sought to make use of Heine for the benefit of the Countess, and the letter in question almost certainly relates to some aspect of the case—very probably the casket. Whether *la* Meyendorf was in Paris at the beginning of 1846, I cannot say for certain but, from what I remember of the proceedings, I think she was. Either the proceedings in the casket case of 1846, or those in Lassalle's of 1848 should provide a clue (best source *Kölnische Zeitung).* If she was in Paris, it was doubtless for the purpose of making an attempt on the casket. Heine and I never discussed Lassalle, whom neither Marx nor I knew at that time.

Your fellow-townsman Weiss came to see me here; has gone to Berne to complete his studies.[6]

A fortnight ago we had a rumpus of our own over here during which Mrs Aveling became involved in a scuffle with the police without, however, coming to any serious harm.[7] The fact is that our Tory government's stupidity is such as almost to rival Puttkamer's. If old Disraeli were to rise up out of his grave, he would lambast these school- boys good and proper.

May I thank you in advance for the article you promised to send me.[8]

Recently I was called upon by Herkner, a quite intelligent man when one comes to converse with him, and a good deal more radical than his book.[9] He seemed very anxious to impress upon me that in reality even Brentano is, at heart, less tame than he makes himself out to be in his books. Indeed, if the gentlemen at German universities only had the courage of their convictions, we should at any rate be as far on as we were in 1837 and 1840. But whether, in that case, they would find an audience is questionable to say the least.

Otherwise, everything goes jogging on in the same old way over here, so there's nothing new to report.

Do write again some time and, if I can be of any service to you over here, I shall be glad to oblige. Cordial regards,

Your

F. Engels