---
id: MECW48-285
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, July 4, 1890"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 July 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "First published in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

[Odde], Friday, 4 July 1890

My dear Laura,

I hope you got as safe to Paris as we did to Norway. We had a very quiet passage, though lots of people sick, sighted the coast of Norway yesterday afternoon, and by 6 were between the islands and rocks. Went up the Harvanger Fiord which leads right into the heart of the country, and are now at the farthest point, Odde, where we remain until to- morrow. Had a drive up the valley this morning and only just back; it rained a little, but not enough to spoil the scenery which is grand. The sun set yesterday at 10 and there was no real night, only a rather deep dusk, and red sky in the north. The people are very primitive, but a sound strong handsome race; they understand my Danish but I cannot make much of their Norwegian. Here at this place the invaders coming by this one ship have cleared the place of Norwegian money in change for English, and the post-office of postage stamps.

[1]

We sail from here to-morrow and shall on Monday be at Trondheim, a good way farther up north. If the scenery does not get worse than what we saw to-day, I shall be quite satisfied. It is in some respects like Switzerland, in others very different. So far the beer is not what one might expect, but I shall reserve judgment until I have seen the towns. This Odde is about twenty houses, including church, hotel, post-office and skolehus.[2] Everything built of timber, although they have about 1.000.000 times more stone than wood.

Well, I hope Nim is well; enjoying herself, and you and Paul are the same. If Mémé[3] was here, she would have plenty to say about my *nase,*[4] the sun has burnt it so that it cracks at every corner.

So now love to the lot of you and enjoy yourselves.

Ever yours