---
id: MECW48-030
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, May 5, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 May 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I, Moscow, 1924 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN ZURICH

London, 5 May 1887

Dear Ede,

You're the most incorrigible Hamlet I have ever come across. You are aware that Kautsky and I keep completely aloof from the local German goings-on here[1] and have to do so if all our time is not to be wasted on piffling tittle-tattle. You are aware that we haven't got a single spokesman in the local association because all these people are involved in embittered feuds of the pettiest kind.[2] So if we do anything at all in this matter, it will cause a stir, the chaps will want to know the whys and wherefores, and the next day it will be the gossip of all the anarchist clubs. If you were to come over here, a visit to the club and a chat there would at once put you in a position to find out all you want within the space of two or three days, and without causing any stir at all. So in addition to depriving us of a pleasure if you stay away, you would fulfil only half the purpose of your journey. The only person we could bring into play would be old Lessner, and he has grown so rusty that he'd make a *pauvre*[3] diplomat.

There's nothing about the Babeuf affair in Avenel's *Lundis*[4] or *Anarchasis Cloots.*—Yes, there is—pp. 42 and 94.[5] —So I shall send you the *Lundis* by registered post. Please let me have it back soon, i.e. in about a fortnight, since I need the book for reference and can't very well dispense with it. I used to have the main source, namely Buonarroti's *Conspiration de Babeuf,* in an English translation[6] brought out by the Chartists but, like so much else, it has been pinched; I have had another good look for it, but without result.

As regards the Russians, there is a point that ought now to be stressed but of which I have nowhere seen any mention.[7] All over Europe reactionaries are fuming about Nihilist regicide[8] and the use of dynamite in particular, special objects of odium being Russian revolutionaries, whose extradition to Russia they are demanding not without success, even in America. But what is the Russian government up to? In Sofia it gets Alexander Battenberg deposed and, if he wasn't shot in the process, this was thanks solely to his own ineptitude.[9] In Bucharest it instigates assassination attempts on Bulgarian civil governors.[10] And, lastly—some four weeks ago in Sofia—it gets a *dynamite bomb* thrown at the house of Major Popoff,[11] the commandant or whatever he is.[12] So everything the Russian government reproaches the Nihilists with and for which it demands their extradition as common criminals, *it is itself doing* through the medium of its notorious agents in Bulgaria. We must demand that, in respect of these specifically Russian modes of procedure, the same standards should be applied to revolutionaries and government alike. This is already felt fairly generally, but it is important that it be said—and pretty loudly at that.

The Schnaebelé affair was obviously a put-up job to get Boulanger into difficulties. The only person to have got the story right, and this as much as a fortnight ago, was Mother Crawford, the Paris correspondent of the *Daily News* and the *Weekly Dispatch,* as is confirmed by Bismarck's dispatch.

Whether or not you people in Switzerland are harassed depends solely on how much warlike hubbub there is. If it grows less, the Federal Council will take heart, but if it increases, then woe betide its trousers.

In confidence. Should *la* Schack return to Switzerland, it might be better not to confide in her too much. She is endowed with an excess of energy which is not always channeled in the right direction. On the one hand she seeks out the liberals from amongst her former acquaintances, on the other her chosen companions are the anarchists among the English workers over here. I personally have no objection to her moving in any circle she pleases, and she herself is a very nice, intelligent and amusing person, but the very fact of her choosing just now, on the eve of a clash with the anarchists in the League (at the Whitsun delegates' conference)[13], to consort with the latter—so much so that the others already call her the Anarchist Countess—is something that must be taken into account. Strictly between ourselves, however, I think she is, all in all, pretty innocuous.

Aveling and Tussy are conducting a splendid propaganda campaign in the East End Radical Clubs,[14] which have been galvanised into life by the example of America and are now seriously thinking of forming an independent labour party. The chaps came to Aveling of their own accord and that's an excellent sign. Should we succeed in gaining a firm foothold there, the Social Democratic Federation[15] and the Socialist League[16] will both be pushed into the background, and a start will have been made on the conquest of London. What is immediately at stake in this instance is a dozen parliamentary seats—these clubs have hitherto been a source of strength to the Liberals here. And even Hyndman has seen the red light, which is why he is repeating in *Justice* the calumnies levelled against Aveling by the New York Executive.[17] This is just what we want for the furtherance of our campaign. But you can see how difficult our work over here is being made by the lubberly calumnies of the wretched New York Executive.

Mumma,[18] who is here at the moment, sends her regards.

Your

F. E.