---
id: MECW48-067
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, October 11, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 October 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in English for the first time i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE[1]

IN PARIS

London, 11 October 1887

My dear Laura,

I was glad to hear you received the cheque all right—a miscarriage with that sort of thing may be a very unpleasant matter and so I was rather anxious about news with regard to it.

I hope by this time you have settled down again, and are not too much disturbed by the precious scandals cropping up around you. This Caffarel affair[2] seems to have been brought forward by the Rouvier- Ferry lot, but if so it was a great mistake. It looks very much like the first scandals brought out by Girardin in 1846/47 and which led much farther than *le rusé Emile*[3] expected.[4] The ball is once set rolling; and no doubt a good crop of further scandals will come to daylight. There are plenty of them going on behind the scenes and this single affair having been dragged forth, will frighten a lot of petty dabblers in the same kind of thing; in their anxiety to get out of danger they are sure to compel *madame la justice* to come forward, however reluctantly, and tackle the people who will be denounced by their frightened associates. Even this one affair bodes no good to the ruling lot; if Wilson is implicated, what is old Grévy to do?

It would be a splendid piece of historical irony if the bourgeois republic was doomed to kill itself by the same *révolution du mépris*[5] which swept away the bourgeois monarchy in 1848.[6]

The Raon-sur-Plaine affair was simply this: *within* Bismarck's empire this way of treating civilians is quite the rule with the military.[7] They are *trained* to it, and rewarded for it; and the cowardly bourgeois press praises such things if committed upon working men, and excuses them if committed upon bourgeois. And then it is of course impossible to drive into the same soldiers that on the frontier they must act differently, and that a Frenchman, a Russian or an Austrian is to be treated with more consideration. That drunken brute Kauffman will either be acquit- ted or, if sentenced, for appearances' sake, to a nominal imprisonment, will be treated like *le bon dieu en France*[8] and promoted hereafter.

The *Socialiste* in its new shape is a considerable improvement upon the old one.[9] Paul could not do everything and his own articles look more worked out since he has not the whole burden upon his shoulders. It will do Deville good to contribute an article per week, his journalistic practice wanted developing and his articles are getting less ponderous.

Next week I expect Bebel here[10] and also probably Singer. Their Congress seems to have been a great success, and the right wing of the party have got a direct snub:[11] Geiser and Viereck have been too cowardly to sign the *Aufrufe* for the Congress, and have consequently been declared incapable of further occupying *eine Vertrauensstellung in der Partei*[12] Bax was also there, he has brought his boy to Zürich where he will be more or less under Bernstein's care and go to Beust's school.

Here things are moving slowly but they are moving. The Trades Union Congress was a splendid symptom.[13] The Tories help us here by all sorts of little police chicanery with regard to open-air meetings— what confounded jackasses they are both here and in Ireland! Jackasses—unless they intend opening next parliament with the announcement that they have tried coercion and broken down and that nothing therefore remains but Home-Rule[14] —thus taking the wind out of Gladstone's sails and bringing in a half-and-half Home-Rule Bill of their own shaping. But I cannot think Salisbury has either so much sense or so much boldness.

In the meantime Champion has openly attacked Hyndman[15] in his paper *Common Sense* (rather *Uncommon Nonsense)*, and the Fabians[16] —a dilettante lot of egregiously conceited mutual admirers who soar high above such ignorant people as Marx—are trying to concentrate the 'movement' in their hands. Very nice amusements *en attendant que la classe ouvrière se mette en mouvement et balaye tous ces mannequins et femmequines*[17] (Mrs Besant is of them too).

Yours affectionately

F. E.

Nim sends her love, is just remanaging the carpet in my room over- head. I have not yet had Sonnenschein's account. I have reminded him of its being due.