---
id: MECW48-026
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, April 23, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "23 April 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published, slightly abridged, in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 23 April 1887

Dear Sorge,

I wrote to you on the 9th inst.[1] Postcard and packages received with thanks. The publication in the *Volkszeitung* of my preface[2] in a translation made over there is doubly scandalous. Firstly because I wish to have nothing to do with the paper so long as it goes on behaving so despicably towards Aveling. Secondly, however, because I cannot approve of my English works being rendered into German by a stranger, especially when the said stranger makes a mass of mistakes and misconstrues the most important passages. The person[3] has had my preface since the beginning of February (posted on 27 January) and in the only letter I have received since then, dated 19 March, postmarked *8 April,* she merely mentions her intention of bringing out a German edition and asks for my assent—she knew I had no copy here. I wrote at once[4] asking her to return me the original so that I could translate it; there are passages in it where every word must be meticulously weighed. And meanwhile she has been conniving with Jonas & Co. behind my back.

I immediately protested. You should ask her to show you my letter.[5]

This is the last straw. It's utterly impossible to work with someone who keeps on playing such tricks.

But there's one more thing she's got coming to her. Her last long letter about the Aveling affair[6] may be summed up in one word: abominable. An attempt by someone who is weak, who is swayed by every puff of wind, to uphold the rightness of a cause she herself knows to be rotten. I shall reply to her next week *con amore.* A person like that mustn't imagine that I can be *bamboozled* like a baby.

Hyndman's letter to *The Standard*[7] is both pitiful and pusillanimous. He wants to remain in George's good graces when the latter is becoming ever more embroiled with his hobby-horse, land,[8] and hence must suppress everything of a socialist nature. He is down on his luck again. The sensational effects have vanished into thin air, nor are new ones to be had every day. Without them, however, Hyndman cannot sustain his role. On the other hand the Avelings have begun agitating to considerable effect in the Radical Clubs[9] of the East End and in so doing are laying special emphasis on the example of an independent labour party set by the Americans.[10] And the American example is the only one that has any pull here—along with that of the German elections.[11] The cause is progressing well and may—if things go on in America as they have been doing—cost the Liberals the entire East End of London before the year is out.

In the Socialist League, too, matters are slowly approaching a crisis. At Whitsun the delegates hold their conference when a decision will, I hope, be reached in the struggle with the anarchist elements who have wormed their way in and have Morris as a supporter.[12]

In Germany there are reprisals upon reprisals.[13] It's as though Bismarck wants to get everything ready so that when revolution breaks out in Russia, in what is now probably only a matter of months, the fun can likewise begin in Germany.

Your

F. E.