---
id: MECW48-106
title: "Letter to Pasquale Martignetti, April 20, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "20 April 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (German), in *La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895,* Milano, 1964 Printed according to the original Published in English for the "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 20 April 1888

122 Regent's Park Road

Dear Friend

I'm glad to hear that a fresh prospect appears to be opening up for you and hope you'll manage to prepare for the exam.[1]

I cannot, unfortunately, suggest any books that might assist your studies in this direction. For an Italian examination German books would cover too much ground on the one hand and too little on the other; moreover, I am not familiar with the more recent short compendiums. Still less do I know of any Italian books that would suit your purpose; the most I could recommend would be Carlo Botta, *Storia dei Popoli d'ltalia* which begins with Constantinus Magnus, circa AD 300. Perhaps also Pietro Colletta, *Storia del Reame diNapoli,* covering the years 1735-1825, a classic. But probably most helpful of all would be the textbooks currently in use in your grammar schools (corresponding to the French *lycées* and *collèges* and our *Gymnasien),* since most of the candidates for archivist's appointments will have attended these establishments and the examiners will therefore have to conform to the syllabus laid down in those schools.

But since it is impossible for you in your present straitened circumstances to purchase these books I deem it my duty to offer you my assistance. I have therefore permitted myself the liberty of taking out the enclosed money order in your name for the sum of four pounds sterling or fr. 10080 *centesimi* and trust you won't be angry with me for sending you this small amount without first obtaining your consent. I only hope that it will be enough, and that you will be able to procure what you need and pass your exam.

You will have read about our Zurich friends' expulsion from Switzerland.[2]

I shall look over and return the translation shortly[3] —as soon as I have finished an important piece for America.[4] Going through a whole lot of numbers at the same time cuts down the work.

With most cordial regards.

Yours

F. Engels

For postal purposes my first name has been given in its *English* form: 'Frederick'.