---
id: MECW48-193
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, May 24, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 May 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 This letter was first published in English in Frederick Engels, Paul and Laura Lafargue. Correspondence. "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 24 May 1889

My dear Lafargue,

Do for goodness' sake expedite the circular[1] with the foreign signa- tures! Here as everywhere else it will be of the greatest importance to us.

Never mind the content, however colourless and devoid of rhetorical flourishes—it's the *signatures* that count. If it reaches us within the next eight or ten days, it will mean victory for us here, otherwise we shall lose the battle for the second time, and this time it will be the Parisians' fault. It is really so difficult to write a circular anyone can sign?

Herewith *Justice* with a manifesto* of which the fury and bare-faced mendacity betray all too plainly the effect created here by the Convocation,[2] even at this late hour. The Social Democratic Federation,[3] you see,—or rather Hyndman—are well aware that what is at stake is their position over here, and likewise that of the Possibilists in France. We shall, of course, reply. But if we could append to our flysheet the Convocation with the foreign signatures, the effect would be tremendous.

The Convocation has appeared in *Commonweal}'**[4] ***** and Morris has come out openly in support of our congress. In the *Labour Elector* W. Parnell, a delegate to the London congress[5] and a very good and capa- ble chap—a worker—says he has got copies of the Convocation for anybody who may want one.[6] A very good acquisition. Tussy has arranged a meeting for tomorrow at which Bernstein (over here we call him Ede, so if I happen to use that name, you will know whom I mean) will meet Burns, Tom Mann and other influential working men. Burns has been nominated for the Possibilist congress by his branch. It will be a very good thing to have men of that stamp at the Possibilist congress, supposing we cannot have them at our own.**

The *Star* has not yet printed Okecki's letter,^0 but only Bax's on Vaillant.^d We shall remind him^e about the former. As he wishes to promote the sale of his paper in Paris, we shall give him introductions to the radical Socialists of the Municipal Council, Longuet, Daumas, etc. What does Okecki say in his letter? Does he deny *outright* the imputa- tion that Boulé accepted Boulangist money? You cannot conceive the importance—both to ourselves and to you—of this English daily, nor how much it would repay the trouble of getting it out of Hyndman's clutches.

The manifesto in *Justice* claims that Farj at voted for the Possibilist congress (at the London congress). This cannot be true! I am asking him by this post to send us a letter we can publish.[7] But no, on second thoughts, I haven't got his address, and the man I had in mind was Fréjac of Commentry and not Farjat. So you would be doing us a great service if you could obtain a letter of this kind for us, and as soon as possible, for over here there's no time to be lost if we are not to lose our public.

I have written to Denmark to find out what is holding things up there[8][9] —but my correspondent belongs to the radical opposition and not to the moderates who lead the party. We have also written to Bebel, telling him how important it is to secure the Danes who, in turn, will be followed by the Swedes and Norwegians, and have suggested that one of the Germans should go there in person if things don't go well.

And now, my dear Lafargue, make haste with the Convocation, signed by everybody concerned. It is the only effective way of stifling all the calumnies and lies put about by the others. And it is most important for the countries still hesitating that they should get it before they have made up their minds. Liebknecht, with his irresolution and dilatoriness, has cost us many a position; do not follow his example. For of one thing you may be certain—if you cause us to lose another battle by what others can only regard as incomprehensible delays, we over here shall be fully justified in losing patience and leaving you to 'shift for yourselves'. It is impossible to help people unless they are willing to help themselves just a little. So send out a circular of some sort, but not one liable to arouse opposition, to the Parties abroad without further delay, collect the signatures and have the thing printed, or send it to us for that purpose—with an English translation by Laura to save time. The prospects are so good, if only the lot of you would deign to put first things first, setting aside all petty rivalries and matters of detail. Don't ruin your own congress, don't be more German than the Germans.

Love to Laura,

Yours ever,

F. E.

Herewith *Justice* and *Commonweal.*