---
id: MECW48-221
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, October 12, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 October 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in: *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the origina"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE[1]

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 12 October 1889

Herewith as usual the *Labour Elector* and *Commonweal.*

The *International Review* is said to have already met its end, thus quickly has Hyndman ruined it by his mismanagement. Bax, however, is in negotiation over another revue;[2] if he acquires it, Aveling will probably be his assistant editor. The revolution in New York[3] gets funnier and funnier; the attempts by Rosenberg & Co. to remain on top *à tout prix,*[4] while amusing, are fortunately doomed to failure. Your exchanges with the nationalists[5] in the *Workmen's Advocate*[6] have gladdened me, firstly because one can recognise old Sorge from 10 miles off and, secondly, because they have once more provided me with *public* proof of your existence.

I don't know whether I wrote and told you that Sam Moore left for Asaba on the Niger (Africa) in June as Chief Justice for the territories of the English Niger Company. I received the first letter from there yesterday; he finds the climate very good and apparently salubrious; the heat is not very great—75° F in the mornings and 81°-83°[7] in the afternoons. Cool, therefore, by comparison with New York. Thus the 3rd volume of *Capital* will probably be translated into English in Africa. I am working on the 4th edition of the 1st volume; the quotations are all having to be revised to conform to the English edition, but it can't be helped. After that I shall buckle down to the 3rd.

Longuet arrived yesterday to fetch his two elder boys,[8] who have been staying with Tussy. As a result of the Opportunists'[9] abstention he polled 800 votes fewer than his opponent. Of our people about 6 were elected, but not, alas, Guesde.

Your

F. E.