---
id: MECW48-073
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, November 23, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "23 November 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 36, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 23 November 1887

My dear Lafargue,

I haven't a bean and shall have to sell some shares, which I cannot do for another two or three days. As soon as the money comes in I will send you a cheque. Meanwhile, here is Sonnenschein's statement in respect of the English edition of *Capital*—it amounts to very little—only £39.12— From that I shall deduct £20 in order to recoup some of the £80 advanced for the translation and paid to the translators. The balance of £19.12—I shall divide into 5 equal parts, 3 for the heirs and 2 for the translators (as was agreed with Laura and Tussy), which results in the following statement:

For the Longuet children^3 £ 3.18.4
" Laura £ 3.18.4
" Tussy £ 3.18.4
£11.15.-

For Sam^b 3/5 £4.14.2
" Edward^c 2/5 £3.12.6
£ 7.17.-
£19.12.-

Cheque for Laura enclosed herewith. Sonnenschein says he has printed 1,000 copies, of which 480 are in stock and 78 have been given gratis either to us or to the press.

224 copies sold in England £336. - 10%
£33.12
200 America
£120.- 5%
£ 6.-
£39.12.-

18
thirteenth gratis[1]

442
558
1,000

As to the American 5%, I shall compare this statement with the contract. But I do not believe we can do anything about it. The fellow has clearly sold far more, but is concealing the fact from us in order to have a year in hand.

The Parisian devil-may-care attitude, cited by you as a symptom of demoralisation, is proudly acclaimed by Camille Pelletan in *La Justice.* My £20 were immediately swallowed up by urgent payments and, indeed, I am completely cleaned out just now. Otherwise I should be sending you a cheque today.

Yours ever

F. E.