---
id: MECW48-091
title: "Letter to Hermann Schluter, February 12, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 February 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN SCHLÜTER

IN HOTTINGEN-ZURICH

London, 12 February 1888

Dear Mr Schlüter,

Unfortunately I shall not be able to send the ms.[1] I promised you by the 20th of this month, the reason being interruptions of all kinds, the arrival next week of the proofs of the *Manifesto* and the special care I am having to take of my eyes just now, while under treatment.

Would you let me know as exactly as possible when printing ought to begin? The 3 chapters of the original *Theory of Force* are ready for the press but the new section is not quite finished yet in the first draft; I am not at all satisfied with the latter and, as usual, it is turning out longer than I had intended. Moreover, the theme is such that it must be dealt with powerfully or not at all.

As soon as you give me a definite date I can let you know whether or not I shall be able to manage it by then. If not, it might be best if you could print something shorter in the meantime, for it will be a question or 3 or 4 weeks at most.

Whether the ms. is suitable for publication in the *Sozialdemokrat* is something that had better be decided on the spot when it arrives.

In any case, having regard to the present critical political situation, a certain amount of delay—to see how things turn out—would seem to me almost mandatory.

With kindest regards,

Yours,

F. Engels