---
id: MECW48-095
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, February 23, 1888"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "23 February 1888"
year: 1888
publication: "First published in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT[1]

IN HOBOKEN

London, 23 February 1888

Dear Liebknecht,

The debate on the Anti-Socialist Law[2] was the biggest triumph we have ever scored in the parliamentary sphere and I'm only sorry that you were unable to be there. However, that's unlikely to go on for much longer, since you will, after all, be taking Hasenclever's place shortly.[3]

Speech on the Question of Free Trade'

[4]

We also have a Puttkamer over here—Balfour, Secretary for Ireland. Just as Puttkamer is Bismarck's cousin, so Balfour is Salisbury's nephew. An arrogantly obstreperous stuck-up squire, exactly like Puttkamer. He too gets soundly thrashed and last week succumbed to a lambasting at the hands of O'Brien,[5] just as Puttkamer does at those of our own people. Moreover, he's as useful to the Irish as Puttkamer is to us. However, you'll glean *absolutely nothing* from the deplorable *Saturday Review,* supposing you still take it, about what's going on over here; so far as anything of importance is concerned, a *conspiration du silence'**[6] ^,*******

prevails.

Bismarck's speech was addressed to Tsar Alexander in person in order that the Gatchina prisoner might at long last learn the truth.[7] Whether it will help is doubtful. The Russians, such is their irresolution, are becoming ever more deeply embroiled and in the end they may not be able to draw back with honour. Therein lies the danger. As a rule they behave like utter jack-asses when they embark on a war. It's a repeat of *Croesus by crossing the Halys will ruin a mighty realm.*''*[8] They can place barely a million men on the border and haven't enough officers for more. France disposes of *VA* million *very good* troops, but no longer has sufficient seasoned men and still fewer officers to provide more. With 2 Vi million seasoned troops and an adequate supply of officers and NCOs, Bismarck has, however, still pitched Germany's strength too low. Nor is it a bad thing that this should be so. Until the revolution gets under way in Russia, Bismarck must not be brought down by an *external* defeat. That would only restore his popularity.

But it is impossible to foretell what will come of the affair if it really gets to the stage of a war. They'll certainly try to turn it into a mock war, but that is not so easy to do. If it is to be done in the way that suits *us* best, and the odds are strongly in favour of it, then let it be a static war with changing fortunes on the French border, an offensive war with the capture of the Polish fortresses on the Russian border, and a revolution in Petersburg which will all at once throw an entirely different light on everything, so far as the gentlemen prosecuting the war are concerned. This much is certain—there will be no rapid decisions, no triumphal marches either on Berlin or on Paris. France is very strong and very cleverly fortified; so far as their disposition is concerned, the works round Paris are a masterly affair.

Last Monday, during the meeting held to welcome Cunninghame-Graham (Communist, Marxist, on the above occasion he called for nationalisation of all means of production) and Burns,[9] Mother Schack was running round selling *Freedom,* the most extreme and strident of the local anarchist papers. She inadvertently offered one to Lessner, among others. Her unsatisfied craving for action seems to have driven her quite dotty.

Reuss has instituted proceedings against the *Commonweal* (Morris) for denouncing him as a spy.[10] Obviously the Prussian embassy wishes to regain over here the ground lost in Berlin. It may, however, be making hellish blunder. Mr Reuss has to go into the witness box, and in this *country perjury* is not to be trifled with. There's no Puttkamer over here to help!

The *Manifesto* is coming out in English, edited by myself.[11] I shall send you one as soon as I get some.

Your

F. E.

Apropos, Pfänder's widow is living over here in the most wretched circumstances. I do what I can and have just sent her another couple of £s. The louts' society[12] put on a concert for her and collected about £5. She herself is ill, her daughter paints, and the pair of them do bits of needlework, but all is wretchedness. Might the party not set aside a trifling sum every quarter? The doctor says she'll barely get through the winter. See what you can do. We really ought to set aside pensions for our veterans' widows.