---
id: MECW48-216
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, September 15, 1889"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "15 September 1889"
year: 1889
publication: "First published in *Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky,* Prag, 1935 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 48"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY[1]

IN VIENNA

London, 15 September 1889

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Kautsky,

I am taking advantage of its being Sunday morning to write you a letter, which I should have done long since—but for interruptions! First the congress[2] and all it entailed, then Eastbourne,[3] whither the after- math of the congress in the shape of letters of all kinds still pursued me and, on top of that, six persons in one room—reflection or repose impos- sible. Then back home, only to find Paul[4] and the soldier,[5] not to mention 2 children,[6] here, then the *dock strike,*[7] etc. Today at last a brief respite. Longuet's two sons,[8] who have come to stay, do not disturb me.

We are all of us, Nim, Tussy, Edward and myself, tremendously sorry that your relations with Louise should have ended in so negative a fash- ion. But there's no help for it. You two alone are competent to judge, and whatever you think is right, the rest of us must accept. But what I don't understand—if I can be said to understand anything at all of this busi- ness—is your continual use of the word 'compassion'—that all you now feel for Louise is 'compassion'. Louise has conducted herself throughout with such heroism and such womanliness that we cannot admire her enough. If anyone is to be pitied in this affair, it certainly isn't Louise. And I still maintain you have perpetrated a folly which you will yet live to regret.

As I have already told Adler, this turn in your relations does nothing to alter the proposal I made you in regard to the ms. of Volume IV.[9] The work has got to be done and you and Ede are the only people to whom I can entrust it. The business of the archives[10] has, Paul tells me, like- wise now been settled which means, no doubt, that you will be coming over here again this winter, when we can discuss and make a start on what is to be done. Because of the damned congress I've been able to do no work at all on Volume III since February, and even now I am kept from it by the necessity of bringing out a fourth edition of Volume I, which I must attend to first. It's no great task but when one is not allowed to spend more than three hours a day at one's desk, it tends to be rather long-drawn-out. And then we have got two months of perpet- ual fog and darkness ahead of us.

A correspondent in St Petersburg has informed me that the *Revue du Nord* has published a translation of your *Klassengegensätze in Frankreich* and that this has caused a furore in Russia. When you come over here I shall give you a hint or two as to how you might, perhaps, extract money from Russia for your articles.

Your articles on the miners in Thuringia)[11] are the best you have done so far—a genuine study that deals exhaustively with the main issues and, moreover, aims simply at investigating the facts and not, as in your paper on population[12] or that on the primaeval family,[13] at confirming a precon- ceived opinion. That is why you have succeeded in producing something substantial. The work throws light on an important part of German history and, though there may be a few minor gaps in the argument, this is of no real moment. Reading it, I realised clearly for the first time (what I had only dimly and vaguely perceived in Soetbeer[14] the extent to which gold and silver production in Germany (and Hungary, whence precious metals were distributed throughout the West via Germany) provided the final impulse which, between 1470 and 1530, put Germany in the lead economically in Europe, thereby making her the focal point of the first bourgeois revolution, in the religious guise of the so-called Reformation. The *final* impulse in the sense that the guild crafts and the commission trade reached a relatively advanced stage of development, thus turning the scales in Germany's favour rather than in that of Italy, France or England.

Liebknecht has *now* come to see that there's nothing to be done with the Possibilists;[15] when you're talking to him he's not nearly so cocksure as he otherwise tends to be, particularly when he writes. How lucky it was that the Possibilists refused, since a union of the two congresses would have led to fighting and general loss of life and we should have been hugely discredited. The campaign launched by the Possibilists and the Social Democratic Federation with a view to casting doubts on our people's credentials has failed miserably.[16] Not only were Adler's reve- lations about the possibilist Austrians[17] (in the *Labour Elector* here) quite devastating, but in this country—and this made an even greater impact over here—the idiots had admitted Burns to the credentials committee, whereupon he mercilessly demolished the credentials of the Social Democratic Federation in the columns of the *Labour Elector}*[18] Hyndman represented 28 people! The entire Federation, alleged to be but 1,925 strong, consists, in fact, of less than half that number!

The Trades Union Congress[19] was Broadhurst's swan song. Burns, Mann and Bateman, the only people to know the details of the charges against Broadhurst, were tied down here by the Dock Strike, and Broadhurst benefited from it; but the congress was rigged, everything having been done to ensure that only Trades Unionists of the old type attended, as was still feasible on this occasion. Nevertheless, there is every sign that the old is in the process of disintegration.

In Denmark the old party leadership have put their foot in it badly over the matter of the congress, and the opposition, Trier, Petersen, etc., are gaining ground.[20] You ought to engage Trier as correspondent for the *Arbeiter-Zeitung*—Gerson Trier, Ahlefeltsgade 16, Copenhagen. The Dock Strike has been won. It's the greatest event to have taken place in England since the last Reform Bills[21] and marks the beginning of a complete revolution in the East End. The reason for the universal sympathy shown by the press, and even by the philistines, is, 1. Hatred of the monopolistic Dock Companies who, instead of writing off the non existent capital they have squandered, fleece the shipowners, business- men and workers so as to be able to declare dividends on it; 2. The knowl- edge *that the Dockers are voters* and need to be cajoled if the 16 to 18 East End M.P.s of Liberal and Conservative complexion wish to be re-elected (which they won't be; this time there'll be Labour M.P.s). What decided the victory was the £14,000 from Australia, whereby the Australian workers will prevent themselves from suddenly being landed with a mass influx of English workers. Burns, Champion, Mann and Tille« have earned their laurels, while the *Social Democratic Federation was nowhere.* The strike is to England what the coalminers' strike[22] was to Germany— it means that a new system, a vast army, has entered the labour move- ment. If we can now get by without a war, the fun may soon begin.

Guesde is standing for parliament in Marseilles, Lafargue in Saint Amand (Cher).

Kindest regards to Adler.

Your

F. Engels

As I don't know whether you still have your hedgehog's apartments[23] I am sending this to Adler, whose address is a safe one. Have received only Nos 1 and 4 of the *Arbeiter-zeitung.* Is it still in the land of the living? Are you still getting the *Labour Elector}* I'm sending you a copy.