---
id: MECW48-025
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, April 13, 1887"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 April 1887"
year: 1887
publication: "First published in English in: Frederick Engels, Paul and Laura Lafargue. Correspondence. 1887-1890, Vol. 2, Foreign Languages Publishing House, Moscow, 1960 First published in the language of the ori"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 13 April 1887

My dear Lafargue,

Herewith the letter for your publisher.[1] I hope you will be successful this time but in any case make sure the copy is returned to you since I have no other to send you.[2] Also negotiate for 20 to 25 free copies for us; we shall be sorely in need of them.

I shall send you the *Daily Telegraph's* report on the meeting of the day before yesterday, in which there in much talk of Tussy.[3]

Schorlemmer was there. It was undoubtedly the biggest meeting we have ever held here.

The New York affair[4] is going very well. The gentlemen of the Executive Committee have done so many silly things that they have already scuppered themselves. It has been a very long business and a very tortuous one, but we no longer have anything to fear from that quarter.

You must have a high opinion of Mr Sonnenschein if you suppose that we have at our disposal copies of the article by Aveling and Tussy. I have only seen the proofs, but I shall ask Tussy to have a copy sent me for you.[5] They'll have to pay for it; Sonnenschein treats his authors as though they were mere clerks.

The day before yesterday the great anarchist Kropotkin accepted the hospitality of the Social Democratic Federation[6] and was with them and Davitt on their waggonnette. Typically, when someone suggested taking Davitt to see Aveling, Davitt said: I cannot meet him because he is an atheist!

Impossible to press for the appearance of your article in *Time*—Price is in the midst of leaving Swan & Sonnenschein, says it is his partner Lowrey who is running the review—a man we have never set eyes on. If only you knew the confusion and disorder that reign in that *business,* you'd be far more patient.

Put yourself forward as candidate in any case, whether or no you stand a chance.[7] It is something you have got to go through, especially in Paris and especially now that you have managed once again to kill off all your periodicals.[8] There's nothing else you can do, for agitation involves keeping oneself in the public eye. With 10,000 francs you can maintain a weekly paper for a long time, and you ought to be able to raise that sum. Come to that, I hope that revolution in Russia will relieve your difficul- ties and will set Europe in motion. Three assassination attempts in thirty days[9] —enough, I should have thought, even for a Tsar.[10] According to the English press, even the pro-Russian, everything is topsy-turvy in Russia; faith in the power of the administration has been shattered, the army teems with Nihilists[11] —482 officers exiled to the island of Sakhalin (Pacific)[12] —, while the peasants, crushed by emancipation,[13] taxation and usury, have been dealt a mortal blow in the shape of compulsory military service on the Prussian system.[14] Add to that the permanent financial crisis, the paper ruble worth 2 fr. 8 or 9 centimes instead of 4, American and Indian competition in corn and not a banker in Europe prepared to lend—such a state of affairs cannot last out the year!

Schorlemmer sends his regards. A kiss to Laura, to whom I shall be writing,

Yours ever,

F.E.