---
id: MECW48-266
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, April 11, 1890"
volume: 48
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 April 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "First published in: *Aus der Früzheit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky,* Prag, 1935 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Wor"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN VIENNA

London, 11 April 1890

Dear Kautsky,

A line or two in great haste before the post goes. First of all my hearti- est congratulations on your engagement. You have been through a diffi- cult time and to me this news is a sign that you've got over it, that you've put it behind you. May you find the happiness you expect.

Schorlemmer and Nim also send you their sincerest congratulations. Thank you for your letter from Stuttgart;[1] yesterday I also got one from Dietz, which I answered straight away, saying that I was entirely satisfied and also confirming that, as I had previously told you, I agree to a new edition of the *Origin,* etc.,[2] as part of the *Internationale Bibliothek* and shall make some additions.

Now as to Dietz's plan to bring you to Stuttgart, that is really a matter you must settle between the two of you. Schorlemmer and I were in Kentish Town.[3] today, but Ede was out and so I doubt whether I shall be able to consult with him before Sunday. As for myself, all I can say is that I should much prefer to have you here, but if your presence in Stuttgart[4] is really necessary and you are never- theless able to visit this country for a month or two each year, I must, for better or for worse, content myself with that. The *Neue Zeit* has become a stronghold which is worth defending to the utmost. And having an influence over Dietz's publishing business generally, which henceforth will be a more important lever in party life than was the case during the period of oppression, is also *à considération*[5] To some extent, naturalisation and a secure berth in Germany can cut both ways, since it means that you would be liable to be thrown out of Austria. And you are also familiar with dear Stuttgart and its delights. I shall give the matter further thought to see whether there may not be some other, not immediately apparent, snags and talk it over with Ede on Sunday.

However I wanted to get this line off to you straight away and it's now 5.25, *ergo* time for the post.

Your

F. E.