---
id: MECW44-004
title: "Letter to Eugen Oswald, July 26, 1870"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 July 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (German) and in Russian, in *Voprosy istorii KPSS,* No. 2, Moscow, 1958 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume "
status: raw
---

MARX TO EUGEN OSWALD

IN LONDON

[London,] 26 JULY 1870

1 Maitland Park Road,

Haverstock Hill, N.W.

Dear Sir,

I must first of all ask your forgiveness for my delay in replying to you. Your letter arrived on Thursday[1] at 6 p.m.; I had just left London for a TRIP IN the COUNTRY.

However, I would not have been able to join in a public Address because the General Council of the International Working Men's Association, of which I am a member, had already charged me with the task of composing a similar Address.[2] The piece had been written already, submitted for discussion and was approved unanimously last Tuesday. It was to have appeared in *The Times* today, but was suppressed, probably because it contained a hit at *Russia.* However, there is some prospect of its appearing in the *Pall Mall Gazette*.[3] Paris is now in a state of siege. We have organs at our disposal in all other West European countries and in the United States.

Should the Address be published here you will discover that its *political* viewpoint (and it is this we are concerned with in the first instance) coincides with your own, however widely our social views may diverge. AT ALL EVENTS, I am convinced that a genuine power of resistance to the return of national antagonisms and the entire system of present-day diplomacy can *only* be found in the *working class.*

However that may be, I am quite prepared to have further discussions on this important subject. Please let me know whether and when you might honour me with a visit, or when I can find you at home.

Yours sincerely,

Karl Marx