---
id: MECW44-067
title: "Letter to Natalie Liebknecht, March 2, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "2 March 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published abridged in: H. Lange, *Aus einer alten Handwerksburschen-Mappe,* Leipzig, 1925 and in full in *Einheit,* Berlin, April 1953, special edition Printed according to the original Publishe"
status: raw
---

MARX TO NATALIE LIEBKNECHT[1]

IN LEIPZIG

London, 2 March 1871

My dear Mrs Liebknecht,

The unfortunately very meagre contributions that I sent you for the benefit of the families of the imprisoned men did not in any sense stem from the General Council of the International which has absolutely no funds for such purposes. The General Council was merely chosen by the subscribers as 'trustee' to ensure that the money was duly sent. Incidentally, *no further evidence of receipt is necessary.*

On the subject of the articles on the German workers' movement which have appeared in English reviews, what Liebknecht probably had in mind was the enclosed article on the *International* by Professor Beesly[2] which appeared in the November number (1870) of *The Fortnightly Review.* It may well be the passages from p. 531 on (I have put a mark to show where they begin)[3] which Stieber wants to use to cook his proof. In the first place, Professor Beesly is *not* a member of the International and his statements are not authoritative for that reason. In the second place, *he himself refutes* Stieber's inferences.

The letter I sent to the Brunswick people[4] was *not* written *in the name of or on the instructions of the General Council.* That is why it was not written on paper with the letterhead of the General Council. My statements there are made entirely in my own name. It was in fact a reply—and a long-deferred reply at that—to a letter asking me *for my personal views.* They were perfectly within their rights to ask for this. At least, I know of no § in the Penal Code that would proscribe it. At any rate, it is not Mr Bismarck's fault if 'my views' cannot be found printed in the *Preussischer Staats-Anzeiger.* The worthy *Lothar Bucher* did invite me after the heady days of Sadowa to write the financial column for that paper. More likely than not he took care not to publicise my reply.[5]

The German Empire is carrying on the campaign of the French Empire against the *International.* Nothing is so characteristic of the last days of the latter empire as the legal persecution of members of the International because they waged war on the intended war. The secret papers of Mr Ollivier published by the Republic are very revealing in this respect.

I was very pleased to receive your letter today. An article by me was to have appeared in *The Fortnightly Review,* but I shall postpone it for the time being, since the inability of the Prussian government to intervene *here* might be more than made good at the expense of friends there [in Germany], who are of course in no way responsible for things that happen without their knowledge.

I would be greatly obliged to you if you could send me the *complete stenographic report* of the *last session of the Reichstag that ended on 10 December 1870.* I would of course reimburse you for the costs.

Jennychen has unfortunately come down with pleurisy. With warmest regards to Liebknecht and yourself.

Yours very sincerely,

K. M.