---
id: MECW44-179
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, January 2, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "2 January 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 2 January 1872[1]

Dear Liebknecht,

First of all, Happy New Year, and then the proofs[2] enclosed.

Marx or Tussy will have written to you about the Stieberian escapade in the *Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung.*[3] It was so transparent that no correspondence was needed to convince you of the deception; the cost of a telegram would have been money thrown away. You did right to denounce the thing as a forgery at once. Compare the names, most of which are false, with the correct ones under the Conference resolutions and you will have direct proof of the forgery.[4]

Marx still has your letter,[5] so I cannot answer it point by point. At all events, you have to find a form that will make it possible for you to be represented at the next congress, and if no one can come, you could have yourselves represented by the old guard here. Since in all probability the Bakuninists and Proudhonists will leave no stone unturned, the credentials will be closely scrutinised and being delegated, for instance, by Bebel and yourself *personally,* as was the case with the conference credentials sent to me, would not make a good impression. The Spaniards are in as bad a position as you but have not let themselves be side-tracked. Incidentally, the decision of the court in Brunswick does not set a precedent. A downright disgrace like that, where even the laws of the Federal Diet can be dragged in, could only happen in a decadent small state. Bebel ought to protest against it in the Reichstag; the men of Progress[6] would either have to support him or stand compromised before the whole of Germany. If I can find the time I shall send a (legal) critique of this pettifogging judgment to the *Volksstaat.*[7]

In Spain, according to a report from Lafargue (who is or was in Madrid), things are going well—the Bakuninists have overshot the mark with the violence of their manner. The Spaniards are workers and want unity and organisation above all else. You will have received the last circular of the congress in Sonvillier,[8] in which they attack the Basle administrative resolutions as the source of all evil. That is really the last straw and we shall now take action.

In the meantime, Hins, Steens and Co., in Belgium, have played us a fine trick (see the resolution of the Brussels Congress in *L'Internationale*)[9]. De Paepe shamefully let them make a fool of him; he wrote that all was well. However, up to now this opposition has kept itself within the bounds of legality and will likewise be dealt with when the time is ripe. Apart from De Paepe, the Belgians were never anything much.

A society in Macerata, in the Romagna, has nominated as its 3 honorary presidents: Garibaldi, Marx and Mazzini. This confusion will show you very clearly the state of public opinion among the Italian workers. Only Bakunin's name is needed and the mess is complete.

Cuttings from *The Eastern Post* (2 meetings)[10] to follow tomorrow; I do not have the last issue anymore and shall only get a copy at today's meeting.

Best wishes to yours and to Bebel.

Your

F. E.

*Notabene.* Have you changed your address? Braustrasse 11?