---
id: MECW44-223
title: "Letter to Johann Philipp Becker, May 9, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 May 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN GENEVA

London, 9 May 1872

Dear Becker,

Your suggestion of Geneva as a location for the Congress has much in its favour and has much support here, but naturally nothing can be decided at the moment since the position can alter from day to day. In the meantime, we must know, if we are to be able to make a final decision, what the situation is like there and whether it will be possible for you *to be assured* of a compact and reliable majority of the Swiss delegates. The Alliance people[1] will use all the old tricks at their disposal to gain the majority for themselves, just as in Basle; the Jurassians will make sure that imaginary sections secure representation. Apart from Turin, the Italians will send *nothing* but friends of Bakunin—even Milan where, since Cuno's expulsion,[2] they once again have the upper hand. The Spaniards will be divided, though it is not yet possible to say in what proportions. Germany will be weakly represented as usual, the same applies to England; for France there will only be a few refugees from there and perhaps some from here; the Belgians are highly unreliable so that very great efforts will have to be made to secure a *respectable* majority. For a slight majority is as bad as none at all, and the squabbling would just start up all over again. So let us know what the situation is with you and in German Switzerland, and speak quite frankly so that we do not miscalculate.

Cuno has also had to flee from Düsseldorf with the police after him and he is now in Seraing near Liège.

Wegmann is in Manchester, but since he delayed so long the situation has changed, business is worse and work is hard to come by. However, I shall see to it that he gets something soon. Best wishes from Marx.

Yours very truly,

F. Engels