---
id: MECW44-341
title: "Letter to Ludwig Kugelmann, May 3, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: "Jenny von Westphalen"
written: "3 May 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in Italian, in *Movimento operaio,* No. 2, Milan, 1955 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

To Ludwig Kugelmann[1] in Hanover

London, 3 May 1872

My dear friend,

Knowing how deep an interest you take in everything that concerns Papa, I hasten to tell you that he has just received the first proof-sheets of the *livraisons*[2] to be published in French.[3]

Unfortunately much time has been lost because M. Lachâtre, the publisher, insisted upon printing in the first *livraison* a portrait of the author of *Das Kapital.* Perhaps we ought to excuse Lachâtre for attaching so much importance to the publication of the portrait if we take into consideration the fact that the Russian government has allowed *Das Kapital* to be printed, but has put its veto upon the issue of the author's likeness![4] However that may be, the fact is that it is owing to the likeness which had to be first taken, then engraved, that a great delay has been occasioned.

The translation of the first part of the book is not so good as we had every reason to hope it would be from the fame of the translator, M. Roy, who has with great success translated Feuerbach. Papa is obliged to make numberless corrections, he has to re-write not only whole sentences but entire pages. This labour, added to the correcting of the proof-sheets[5] from Germany[6] and to the overwhelming International business is too much even for Papa, though you know his *Arbeitskraft*[7] is extraordinary. I hope therefore you will pardon him for not writing oftener to you. It is absolutely impossible for him to do so. I greatly fear he will soon fall ill again—as so much work will be unendurable when the hot weather sets in. At the present moment his health is not bad.

I suppose you have seen from the German papers that the International has been fiercely attacked in the House of Commons? Enclosed is the answer issued by the General Council[8] and which (with the exception of *The Eastern Post*) not one London paper has had the common fairness to insert.[9]

Though the British Government has been obliged to declare its inability to comply with the wishes of M. Thiers openly to interfere with the International, it secretly does all the dirty work demanded of it. Mr Gladstone furnishes M. Thiers with the correspondence of the General Council to the Continent. Last week, for instance, Outine from Geneva wrote to inform us that a letter Papa had written to him on International affairs[10] had evidently been opened, and that, strange to say, at the post-office in London the words *via Ostende* had been changed for *via Calais,* which of course enabled the Versaillists to make themselves acquainted with the contents of the letter. And this letter had been registered!

We have had very sad news from Spain. Our poor little Schnaps[11] is very very ill. He has never recovered from the terrible attack of cholera he had last August. He is getting weaker and weaker.

Will you please give my love to Trautchen and tell her I will write to her soon.

With kindest regards from all at home to yourself, Trautchen and Käuzchen[12]

Believe me, my dear friend,

Very sincerely yours,

Jenny Marx