---
id: MECW44-210
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, March 15, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "15 March 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stutt"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE[1]

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 15 March 1872

33 Rathbone Place, W. C.

(new address of the General Council)[2]

Dear Citizen,

I enclose the Resolutions of the General Council (in English and French)[3]. The other Council[4] will receive them from Le Moussu.

Eccarius, at the end of the sitting of 12 March, told rhe privately that he would not send the Resolutions to New York and that, at next sitting, he would tender his resignation as Secretary for the United States. As this affair cannot be settled by the General Council before Tuesday next,[5] the Resolutions sent by me and Le Moussu, are not signed by a Secretary, the which, considering the form chosen, was not necessary. They will be printed in next week's *Eastern Post.*

During the discussion Eccarius spoke in a spirit most hostile to your Council. He spoke and voted against Resolution III, 2.[6] He was moreover offended because, in order to save time, I had not submitted the Resolutions to the subcommittee[7] of which he forms part, but laid them at once before the General Council. As the latter fully approved this proceeding, after my statement of the reasons which had induced me to act as I have done, Eccarius ought to have dropped his personal spleen.

For the *private* information of your Council I add that M. and Madame Huleck—he is an imbecile and she is **une intrigante de bas état***."'[8] *—had for a moment slipped into the General Council at a time when most of us were absent, but that, soon after, this worthy couple was forced to withdraw consequent upon their intrigues with the *soi-disant Branche Française*[9] the which was excluded from the *International* and denounced by us, in the *Marseillaise* and the *Réveil,* on the eve of the plebiscite,[10] as **une section policière*[11]****[12] *

Moreover, these two persons, after their arrival at New York, cooperated in the foundation of a Society hostile to the International and were in constant connection with *les beaux restes de la branche française*[13] at London. The same facts have been communicated by Le Moussu to the other Council.

Section 10 (French) has written an excellent letter to the General Council on the American split.[14]

Yours fraternally,

Karl Marx