---
id: MECW44-267
title: "Letter to Theodor Cuno, October 29, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 October 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in *Die Gesellschaft,* No. 11, Berlin, 1925 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO THEODOR CUNO

IN NEW YORK

London, 29 October 1872
122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Cuno,

Received your letter of the 8th and the minutes;[1] many thanks for both.

The *Bulletin jurassien,* which you will have received,[2] and the *Internationale* of Brussels, which is going off today, will prove to you that we must really get down to it and that it is absolutely essential for *Sorge* at least to shake off his reservations and agree to an election[3] so that not just unity of action but above all action itself can be ensured. If we do not, without further ado, take energetic steps to suspend the Jurassians because of their Congress resolutions, which ride roughshod over the Rules and the Hague resolutions,[4] and to expel the members of the anti-authoritarian Congress,[5] in so far as they belong to the International at all, and to proclaim and justify such actions, then these people really will become altogether too cocksure. Time is still on our side: the Belgians are frightened by their own initial courage and are vacillating, in Spain the opposition to the Alliance people is growing stronger by the day, they are already calling for an extraordinary Spanish congress to examine the behaviour of the Federal Council and the delegates in The Hague—but all of this will go cold if the impertinent behaviour of the Jurassians is tolerated. And you can see from Hales' letter in the *Internationale*[6] that these men will do their utmost.[7] Hales is the Jurassians' correspondent and distributes their *Bulletin* with its filthy articles here gratis to anyone who will take it and he sends it to all the sections.

I must close now to catch the post. Marx and I are overloaded as never before with work on the Congress, preparing things for print, and with correspondence.[8] Sorge will have received the *Emancipación,* you can translate it for him. The next steamer will bring another few issues. Along with the *Volksstaat* it is our best paper.

The business with West amused us greatly. We all send our best regards to Sorge and yourself.

Your

F. Engels

Lafargue and wife[9] arrived here the day before yesterday.[10]