---
id: MECW44-043
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 14, 1870"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 September 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in full for the first t"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 September 1870

DEAR FRED,

Am sending 12 COPIES of the ADDRESS[2] at the same time as this letter. Various minor printing errors, small words omitted, etc., but nothing that distorts the meaning. This will be corrected in the second edition. You must bear in mind that the GENERAL COUNCIL HAS

^a V. Hugo, 'Aux allemands', *Le Rappel* No. 455, 10 September 1870 and *Le Moniteur universel.* No. 253, 10 September 1870. - ^b Wilhelm [I], 'Der Königin Augusta in Berlin', *Königlich Preußischer Staats-Anzeiger,* No. 253, 7 September 1870. - ^c In the original the word 'educated' is written in Berlin dialect[3]

TO DEAL WITH SUSCEPTIBILITIES in every direction, and so cannot write as we both could in our own names.

The news from Brunswick[4] arrived yesterday evening from Liebknecht, but with Wilhelm's usual vagueness and hence unusable. I have sent notices about it today to the *Pall Mall, Echo,* etc.^a

The FACT itself is very good. This time the witch-hunt against the 'demagogues'[5] is beginning *before the end of the war,* and is aimed at workers rather than the student windbags of yore. It is very good that the Prussians are showing themselves in their true colours, and are destroying any possible illusions in the working class even before peace is concluded. Moreover, the working class can only be stirred to action by direct persecution on the part of the state.

The 'Republic'—even the mere word—has given the matter quite a new turn. E.g. Mr *George Potter*—that hero of the workers from the *Bee-Hive*—has PUBLICLY declared himself A REPUBLICAN. This shows you the mood in London. I hope that the Prussian policies of the Court will produce a lot of ill-feeling here. It is a splendid

LEVER, the UNCONSTITUTIONAL INTERFERENCE OF THE GRANDDAUGHTER OF George III AND THE MOTHER-IN-LAW OF Fritz^b!

For all that Bismarck is a jackass. Just because everything went right for him as long as he was the instrument of the aspirations to German unity, he has now lost his head to such an extent that he imagines himself able to throw all scruples to the winds and pursue specific Prussian policies, not merely externally, but internally too.

Yesterday there was a workers' meeting in a pub in Lincoln Inn Fields. We were sitting in our own meeting as usual on Tuesdays. A telegram arrived TO COME TO THE RESCUE. The PEACE SOCIETY 56 fellows, who have been actively 'buying up' workers (e.g. Cremer), had as good as managed to assure themselves of a majority, albeit a slight one. Our sudden appearance TURNED THE SCALE. At issue was a number of resolutions on behalf of the FRENCH REPUBLIC, which the PEACE SOCIETY claims could lead to war with Prussia. I have today sent detailed instructions to Belgium and Switzerland, ditto to the UNITED STATES.

The enclosed letter from Serraillier^c will interest Dupont and yourself. Only a part of it is enclosed, since the other part contains

^a K. Marx, 'Concerning the Arrest of the Members of the Central Committee of the Social-Democratic Workers' Party'. - ^b Queen Victoria, whose daughter, Victoria Adelaide Marie Louise, was married to Frederick William, Crown Prince of Prussia. - ^c See this volume, p. 80.

FAMILY AFFAIRS and so has remained in the possession of Mme Serraillier.

*Salut*

Your

K. M.
SECRETARY FOR RUSSIA!

Schäffle's book is called *Kapitalismus und Socialismus etc.*