---
id: MECW44-181
title: "Letter to Maltman Barry, January 7, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 January 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Reproduced from the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume"
status: raw
---

MARX TO MALTMAN BARRY

IN LONDON

[Draft]

[London,] 7 January 1872

Dear Sir,

I regret that you found neither me nor Mr Engels at home. You seem to proceed in your letters from the idea that we form a distinct party in the Council. If we opposed Mr Hales in what we considered wrong, we did only our duty[1] and would, under the same circumstances, have followed the same line of conduct towards any other member of the Council.[2] This, however, has nothing to do with party. We know of no parties in the Council. There are among the friends of Mr Hales very worthy men who have worked for a long time in our cause.

If Mr Mottershead has 'consented to stand for the secretary- ship', we at all events did not invite him to do so. His position as paid secretary of the 'Labour Representation League'[3] makes the thing almost impossible. Mr Engels told you expressly after last Tuesday's meeting[4] that his mind was not yet made up as [to] who was the proper person to vote for, and for the present we see difficulties on all sides. Hence we have resolved to leave our continental friends to their own discretion.

In our opinion the important thing is, to settle the position and composition of the Federal Council. As to the secretaryship, it is mainly a personal matter which need not and, perhaps, cannot be settled in a hurry. At all events this will depend upon cir- cumstances.

Yours truly,

K. M.