---
id: MECW44-270
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, November 16, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 November 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published abridged in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906, and in full in: Marx an"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 16 November 1872

Dear Sorge,

Your letter of the 25th crossed with mine of 2 November. Marx will have written to you since then.

I gave a copy of the Address[1] to Serraillier in French and first of all to MacDonnel in English for the Irish. I next copied one out myself for *The International Herald* and lastly sent one to the FEDERAL COUNCIL. The fact is that I was very uncertain whether the FEDERAL COUNCIL might not suppress it or, alternatively, that they might not print it *word for word* with various mistakes in the English and strong Germanisms, so as to expose it to ridicule. I have, of course, changed the latter since the Address was, *as it stood,* quite unprintable either in English or French. We have always had such things corrected by some educated NATIVE. You will have to do the same as in official documents it is often not possible to make even grammatical alterations, and it is always fatal. For Hales and the Jurassians, etc., any mistake of that sort is in any case a source of amusement.

Up to now the Belgians have not printed anything. You will have to send the Address to Australia yourselves; you will have had a visit from Harcourt in the meantime; I do not have any addresses in Australia.[2]

Jones and Le Moussu have been warned. I shall see Serraillier tomorrow and shall tell him to send you a report which, on account of *Dereure,* will have to dispense with both names and addresses—the latter he can send you *privatim.* More on Dereure below.

The stamps[3] cost about *£1*—Le Moussu did the design gratis. To print the Rules in English[4] cost around £12.

I have already told you of the formation of two new Italian sections.[5] The official letter now enclosed.

I am sending you today: 1 *Emancipation* and the manifesto of the *Nueva Federation Madrilena*[6]

1 *Égalité* 1 *International Herald*—report of the FEDERAL COUNCIL[7] 7 *Résolutions du Congrès de la Haye.* The following matters to report in addition: 1. *Blanquists.* They have issued a pamphlet: *Internationale et révolution* of which several copies per NEXT STEAMER. They announce their resignation from the International on the grounds that with the transfer of the General Council to New York it has committed suicide. They will found their own association and are already intriguing actively in France. It is therefore absolutely essential, firstly, that Dereure should not get hold of any addresses in France, and secondly, that he should say where he stands. Of course, this second point is only urgent if you consider it desirable. Serraillier will reply to this concoction in the *Liberté* and the *Égalité.* Ranvier has told Lafargue that the first draft was so full of personalities that he declared he would never put his name to it. He had never seen the second, published, version and his name appeared under it without his authorisation. He has quarrelled with them: they have had the audacity to put him on trial because he continues to belong to a refugee club called the *Cercle d'Études Sociales*[8] without permission, and he refused to submit to a schoolmasterly examination in the court set up by the *purs* (which is the name the Blanquists give themselves). As you can see, they are playing at *Commune révolutionnaire* in the same old way. You will be amused by their little pamphlet in which Vaillant in all seriousness presents all our economic and political ideas as Blanquist discoveries. They have already started to cause trouble[9]

in various places in France, apart from Paris where that tall man, Walter, is their agent. Although they are not a threat, they must not be given the means to stir up even more trouble, which is why Dereure must not have any addresses and why we must keep an eye on him.

2. *Spain.* Matters are going splendidly here. The FEDERAL COUNCIL has had a long thing printed and circulated on the quiet.[10] It contains

a) a report on the Congress by the 4 Spaniards which is full of lies,[11]

b) the resolutions of the anti-authoritarians of Saint-Imier,[12]

c) a motion from the Barcelona Federation to convoke a Spanish Congress on 25 December which would decide between the resolutions of The Hague and Saint-Imier,

d) a request to all local federations to give their views on this *by 10 November.*

The *Nueva Federación Madrilena* replied to this with the manifesto being sent to you today. It objects to the submission of the Hague resolutions to any International assembly except for the purposes of consideration and implementation. (We have already sent the materials necessary to counter the lies of the 4 Spaniards to Madrid.)

However, in order that the Spaniards should realise *who* actually rules them, the Jura Committee has already sent the Saint-Imier resolutions direct to all local federations in Spain with the request for their views on them; they have completely by-passed the Spanish FEDERAL COUNCIL.

In the meantime, things have been happening in Spain. The federations of Gracia (industrial suburb of Barcelona) with 500 members, of Toledo (200 members) and those of Badalona and Denia near Barcelona, have come out in our favour and against the Spanish Congress. In Valencia a large part of the local federation is on our side, as well as part of the one in Cadiz, which has already broken away from the old federation there. The sale of the *Emancipación,* which had been moribund and kept alive by money we had sent from here, is greatly on the increase once more (150 copies in Cadiz, Valencia and Gracia alone). In Gracia there was a large general assembly on 4 November.[13] The Barcelonese, with Alerini at their head, put their proposal forward, but as Mora (who is there) writes:

'Despite all his shouting and gesticulating with his arms and his stick, Alerini was unable to convince these atheists that the Society of Jesus[14] had been acting well. So it was resolved to approve all the Hague resolutions and to censure the attitude of the Spanish delegates.'[15]

Things are going well; if the worst comes to the worst we shall keep a very respectable minority in Spain which will part company with the rest and be of greater value than all the vague nonsense hitherto. However, it is quite possible that we shall smash the whole thing to pieces and throw the Alliance out. For all of this we have Mesa to thank, who has had to bear the brunt *all on his own.* Mora is feeble and at one point vacillated for a moment. Read the article 'Los medios de la Alianza', in *Emancipación* No. 71, to see how the Spanish FEDERAL COUNCIL attempted to win over Mora by INTIMIDATION.

3. *London FEDERAL COUNCIL.* Thanks to the slackness of the better people among the English, Hales and Mottershead have succeeded in gaining complete control of the FEDERAL COUNCIL. A mass of delegates from imaginary sections have momentarily provided Hales with a majority; he is secretary and treasurer all in one, and you can see from the report in today's *International Herald*[16] that he is doing as he pleases. The only thing we can do is to hold the better elements together until those crooks clash with each other, which will happen soon enough. GIVE THEM ROPE ENOUGH AND THEY WILL HANG THEMSELVES. You will now be receiving *The International Herald* regularly so that you can see for yourselves how Hales is giving himself airs and acting as if he were the GENERAL COUNCIL. As soon as an opportunity presents itself—a breach of the Rules or something of the sort—and, as an intimate and correspondent of the Jurassians, Hales will provoke one soon enough, our people will split off and form a federation of their own, perhaps one together with the Irish. Unfortunately MacDonnel is leaving for America, but even so we have a very good successor to him in De Morgan, one, moreover, who travels all over England as a LECTURER. He is completely in the picture about the situation.

In order to ensure here the desired publicity for your proclamations, etc., it would be good if the General Council could *officially* put me in charge of these matters for England. The FEDERAL COUNCIL undoubtedly suppresses as much as it can, and although Riley of *The International Herald* is an honest fellow and has left the FEDERAL COUNCIL in DISGUST, he is weak and somewhat dependent on the FEDERAL COUNCIL for the sale of his paper. So if I can show him a resolution to that effect he will be covered and will do everything.

I leave it to you to decide whether you wish to send me plenary powers for Italy.[17] In view of the struggle there, in which our people are in a tiny minority, swift intervention would be very desirable. I do indeed maintain my private correspondence with them and also write for the *Plebe,* but without plenary powers I cannot exert any influence on the sections, which, like the one in Turin, appear to be going to seed entirely and do not communicate at all, something which happens all too often in Italy.

Marx is on a visit to Longuet and his wife in Oxford for a few days[18] so as to go through a part of the French translation of *Capital*[19] with Longuet. He will probably not be back before Monday.[20]

In my opinion you should in any case delegate plenary powers for France to Serraillier.[21] This sort of correspondence cannot possibly be conducted from over there; only, you should require him to send you monthly reports. You will not find anyone better; Dupont is too negligent unless he is spurred on daily and we frequently do not see him here for a fortnight at a time.

As to the Jurassians, it is our view that the best way to proceed is simply to declare that they had disqualified themselves from membership of the International by the resolutions of *their* congress in Saint-Imier,)[22] which contravene such-and-such articles of the Rules and Administrative Regulations, and then simply to notify the other federations of this fact. Incidentally, things are going badly for them. In Biel, where they no longer had a single member (see *Scissions*[23], a new section has been formed but it has affiliated itself to *Geneva,* and their model section in Moutier (see *Scissions)* has *repudiated* the resolutions of Saint-Imier. As you see, the Hague resolutions[24] are already bearing fruit everywhere.

As for Germany, it would be good if Marx were to have plenary powers—just in case of emergencies with the Schweitzerians.

All these are matters that you must consider. I am up to my eyes in work here. The fact that Mesa has started to translate the *Manifesto* has forced me to send him a revised version of the French translation from the *Socialiste.*[25] The version you brought with you in manuscript turned out to be very useful in this, as it is much better, although still based on *Woodhull's* English.[26] I am taking the opportunity this provides to put the French translation in order altogether. In addition I have articles to do for *Volksstaat, Emancipación* and *Plebe;* and as soon as Lafargue, who is now here, has found somewhere to live, we shall make a start on the *Alliance* business.[27] Lucain still has a lot of papers in Brussels and now writes that he will send them *at the end of next week,* because he wants to copy them![28]

What is that scamp Cuno up to?

Your

F. Engels