---
id: MECW44-096
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, June 22, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 June 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT[1]

IN LEIPZIG

London, 22 June 1871

Dear Liebknecht,

Herewith the translation of Section I of the Address.[2] The rest will follow so quickly that you can print Section I in *two* successive issues, i.e. you will have more copy in 8 days. On condition

1. that you print quickly and *a lot* in each issue; 2. that there are no marginal notes; I have translated so as to make them superfluous, apart from innuendos and details which could not in any case be explained in a few words;

3. that the type is left standing for separate publication as a pamphlet, which on this occasion is extremely necessary. If you do not have the money or credit for this, let us know.

Anything you *cannot* print you should replace with dots and send the relevant part of the manuscript to Becker in Geneva for him to publish it in the *Vorbote* (mark it clearly so that he can see where such passages fit in).[3]

You will have already received the copy of the original Address which I sent you *as a letter* with a few lines.[4] More of these are available.

The Address has caused a tremendous hullaballoo here in London. First they tried to ignore it, but it was not possible. On Wednesday the 14th, *The Evening Standard* published a denuncia- tion, on the 15th *The Daily News* had an excerpt that then went through most other papers. Then *The Echo, Spectator* on Saturday, *Graphic, Pall Mall Gazette, Telegraph*—with leading articles, and that was it. On Monday *The Times* followed with a really lousy LEADER, then the *Standard* once more, yesterday *The Times* again, and the whole of London spoke only of us.[5] All wailing, of course. *Tant mieux.*[6]

I simply do not understand your scruples about deportation.[7]

In your place I would not give up Hessian citizenship without having a substitute safely in my pocket. You are too timid on this issue. A single great public scandal, which would make it clear to the whole world what a humbug all these imperial laws really are, would put an end to all this nonsense. But if you avoid the scandal which can only redound to the detriment of servile nationalists, instead of provoking it, then the police will obviously do what they like. N.B. all this refers only to the relevant passage in your letter, not the stance adopted by the paper[8] which is extremely courageous, and which we *wholeheartedly* salute. But do not imagine that the police scum would attempt to do to you what they venture to do to individual workers; they would only dare try it once they had created enough precedents by deporting workers over a period of time.

I did not at all realise that your deportation from Prussia was still in force. It may be that the police *maintain* this. But I was never able to comprehend why you did not settle the matter while you were still a deputy.

I am unable to correspond for the *Volksstaat,* but, as you see, I help wherever I can.

Nothing can be done about *The Pall Mall Gazette.* I have myself had all sorts of conflicts with the paper, even in the case of exclusively military articles, and neither you nor I can get political things accepted. I only keep the contact going TO KEEP A FOOTING THERE, so as to be able to print things there from time to time. If they did accept you as a correspondent, which they will not do, *none* of your reports would be printed. I even went so far in the New Year as to tell the editor[9] I knew full well that I could only produce military articles for him and not political ones, and said I only did this in the hope that he would publish our factual notices dealing with Party affairs when we thought it necessary. And this is what has happened.

You seem to have a very good idea of Reynolds. The greatest scoundrel in the press here, an arrant coward whenever he is uncertain of success, he has suppressed the entire Address right down to the extract from *The Daily News.*

The German workers have behaved themselves quite splendidly in this last great crisis, better than anyone else. And Bebel has been an outstanding spokesman on their behalf; his speech on the Commune went through the entire English press and made a great impression here. You should send the *Volksstaat* to the *Pall Mall* from time to time; they publish items from it occasionally because the man is afraid of Marx and myself, and because there is another man[10] there who knows German and makes use of such things. Moreover, the paper readily publishes all sorts of curious information that others do not include.

I would be grateful if you could send my copy of the *Volksstaat* to me *here,* and not to Manchester any more. Please send me 3-4 copies of the issues with the Address, one for proof-reading, the rest for distribution.

Best regards to you and yours.

Your

F. E.