---
id: MECW44-343
title: "Letter to Ludwig and Gertrud Kugelmann, June 27, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: "Jenny Marx Longuet"
written: "27 June 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in Italian, in *Movimento operaio*, No. 2, Milan, 1955 First published in English in *Archiv für Sozialgeschichte,* Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung Publishers, Vol. II, [Hanover] 1962. Repro"
status: raw
---

To Ludwig and Gertrud Kugelmann in Hanover

[London,] 27 June 1872

My dear friends,

If you knew how often I have sat down to write to you, and how often I have been interrupted before I had written half a dozen lines, I am sure you would forgive me for not having answered your last letter before this.

You, my dear Doctor, will be glad to hear that Mohr is entirely of your opinion with regard to his activity in the International. He is convinced that so long as he remains in the General Council, it will be impossible for him to write the second volume of *Das Kapital*, at which he has been unable to work during the last year. Consequently, he has made up his mind to give up his post as secretary immediately after the next Congress. Until that time however, he will have to work terribly hard in the Council and out of it, in order to prepare for the great battle that will be fought out at the Congress, which is to take place in Holland.[1]

You will have some idea of this work when I tell you that besides writing manifestoes, reading or answering mountains of letters, Mohr is obliged to attend not only the usual weekly sittings at Rathbone Place, but additional ones at our house and that of Engels,[2] the last of which lasted from four in the afternoon until one o'clock in the morning. So much for International business.

The remaining time (and there is not much of it) is given up to the correction of the proof-sheets[3] from Meissner, and the revision of the French translation,[4] which unfortunately is so very imperfect, that Mohr has been obliged to re-write the greater part of the first chapter. The first livraison[5] consisting only of the portrait of the author, after the enclosed photograph by Mayall—an autograph letter[6] and answer from the publisher Lachâtre, will shortly appear, in about a week.—Of the Russian translation, which is excellent, a thousand copies have already been sold, and the second edition is being printed. The French translation of the *Civil War* is producing a very good effect upon the refugees, equally satisfying all parties—Blanquists, Proudhoniens, and Communists. It is a great pity it did not appear earlier,[7] as it would undoubtedly have done much towards smoothing down the animosity against the General Council.—

And now, my dearest Trautchen,[8] let me also give you some news. In all probability the marriage so often announced by the presse policière de Paris will take place somewhere about the middle of July—the 18th or 19th. Last week the *Gaulois* married me for the 20th time. It selected the notorious Landeck as my husband.[9] When I am married in good earnest I suppose those idiotic scribblers will let me alone.

I cannot send you M. Longuet's photograph, my dear friends, as I only have a very horrible one, that is being exposed in the shop windows, a caricature made to please the bourgeoisie, and to satisfy them that physically as well as morally the *Communeux* are the monsters for which they took them. So soon as I have a better likeness I will send it [to] you. What do you think of the enclosed one of Papa? We all greatly admire it and think it superior to the one he had taken at Hanover.—

With best love from all at home to yourselves and Käuzchen[10]

Believe me as ever

your affectionate friend

Jenny Marx