---
id: MECW44-249
title: "Letter to Adolf Hepner, August 4, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 August 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO ADOLF HEPNER[1]

IN LEIPZIG

London, 4 August 1872

Dear Hepner,

I was about to write a brief article for you on the latest Bakuninist affairs, when it developed that the General Council would have to make a statement on the matter itself. Thus the article has turned into an address,[2] the German translation of which you will receive on Wednesday.[3]

The latest Spanish documents may well serve as a supplement shortly.[4] Bakunin retained the *Alliance de la démocratie socialiste,'**^10***** which you know of from the *Scissions,'****[5] * as a *secret* society in order to obtain control of the International. But we learned of this, and now we have the proof. Thus, the charge will now be made publicly, as otherwise the elections to the Congress in Spain[6] would be run by the Alliance and their outcome would be in its favour. Bakunin will break his neck in this affair.

You will have received the reply to the *Concordia.***[7] * So that is what the armchair socialists amount to! I had not thought that they could be as stupid as *that,* I had thought that the paper must be edited by someone like Beta-Bettziech.***

The *factum* of Verdy was something I knew from the *Kölnische Zeitung,* but I did not know that the man was also a trickster.[8] Very fine. That wretched Sonnemann, incidentally, regards every great historical event merely as an opportunity to change his lousy Frankfurt back into a free city of the Empire. And for this reason the Prussians must always serve as whipping-boy. According to our information, the preparations are being made on such a colossal scale that the Prussians can be defeated only if they are opposed by Austria, as well as France and Russia. But Austria will be *on* Prussia's *side,* unless some sudden change occurs, which is not to be expected in the circumstances. Moreover, we shall soon witness the diverting spectacle of William[9] issuing an appeal to the Poles and re-establishing some sort of Poland. And with this he, and the whole Prussian regime, will break their necks. The Prusso-German Empire is far from having reached its culminating point; this war (if it ends well, which is to be expected) will swiftly raise it to its climax, and then it will come tumbling down from the dizzy heights of Napoleonic glory. It is quite possible that *this time* the movement will start in Berlin; the contradictions are growing very acute there, and all that is required to bring things to a head is a change in the political situation. A Berlin revolution of that kind will certainly be pretty rough, but still it is better for it to come from within than after a Sedan, which only brings harm everywhere.[10]

Hirsch must send to Switzerland for the following writings of Bakunin:

*Lettres à un français* (anonymous), Geneva 1871. *L'Empire knouto-germanique* by M. Bakounine, Geneva 1871. This is not obtainable from booksellers, I have tried it, but Boruttau will certainly get it for him since he is in raptures about it.

Pass on my greetings to Liebknecht and Bebel when you next visit them.

Best regards.

Yours,

F. E.