---
id: MECW44-029
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, August 20, 1870"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "20 August 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Part of th"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN RAMSGATE

Manchester, 20 August 1870

Dear Moor,

I hope that your rheumatism has become less acute. The chloral will have done you some good; if not, then see a doctor and ask him to prescribe a sedative. Gumpert is in Wales and hence unavailable for consultation.

I have written a vigorous letter to Smith today about the house.[1] I can't let myself be humbugged any longer by this GROUSE-SHOOTING ARISTOCRAT. I was supposed to be there in 4 weeks, yet it was 5 weeks yesterday since I reached agreement with Smith and there is still no answer!

I think that the ANNEXATION of the French Germans is as good as settled. If a revolutionary government had been formed in Paris as late as last week something still might have been done about it. *Now,* however, it comes too late and can only make a fool of itself by parodying the Convention. I am convinced that Bismarck would have settled for a peace without cession of territory with a revolutionary government if it had come on the scene in time. But the way France is behaving now he has no reason to resist the pressures from without and his vanity from within. It is a great pity, but it seems to me inevitable. If Germany were a state like France, it would be easier to find excuses. But as things stand, with the need to divide the conquered territory between the three neighbouring countries, it is ridiculous. Even more ridiculous is the fact that the Germans should be willing to lumber themselves with a German-speaking Venetia in the West.[2] I shall try to obtain the ponderous Blind's weighty pamphlet, but it will likely as not come too late.[3]

What do you think of Mack-Bazaine? Mac-Mahon was bad enough, but now we shall have Mack (of Ulm)—*tout court*?[4] It will be an unheard-of thing if 120,000 Frenchmen have to lay down their arms, and that will doubtless be the result.[5] Just imagine that old mule William[6] deflowering *la pucelle*[7] of Metz in his old age! There has never been such a *dégringolade*[8] as the one now displayed by the 2nd Empire. I am only curious to see whether the Parisians will not finally muster the energy to do something when they learn the truth about the events of this last week.[9] Not that it would be of any use any more. The demolitions undertaken around Paris to facilitate its defence are on such a colossal scale that I cannot believe they have been carried out properly. The population of the city has almost trebled since 1840 and the difficulties of provisioning it likewise. And finally, all traffic relies so greatly on the railway now that if a few bridges are blown up on every line it will be almost impossible to bring any supplies worth mentioning into the city, even if the blockade is not complete.

The losses of the last few weeks must be enormous. Throughout the entire war the Germans have used bayonets with the greatest determination. And now they have been deploying cavalry against unflinching infantry so that men must have been falling like flies. The handsome William[10] has made no mention of all this. But this much is certain: man for man and battalion for battalion, the Germans have proved their most decisive superiority over the French. First at Spicheren[11] where they had 27 battalions against (at least) 42 French battalions which were occupying an almost impregnable position. After Thursday's battle[12] it will be almost impossible to restrain the demoralisation in the French camp.

Is Kugelmann in Carlsbad?[13] I do not know where to send the portrait.

Best wishes from Lizzie and me to you all. I hope to hear good news from you soon about your rheumatism.

Your

F. E.