---
id: MECW44-220
title: "Letter to Johann Georg Eccarius, May 3, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "3 May 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JOHANN GEORG ECCARIUS[1]

IN LONDON

[London,] 3 May 1872

Dear Eccarius,

You seem to have lost your wits and as I regard this as a passing phase, at least for the present, perhaps you will allow me to address you for the time being as neither SIR, nor *Herr* nor *Domine,* and also to write to you in German instead of English.

If you haven't lost your memory along with your command of the German language—and if you have, the MINUTES of the General Council can jog it—you will recollect that all the quarrels I have had with the English since the founding of the International up to the last conference;[2] have been due simply and solely to the fact that I always took your side. Firstly, on the subject of *The Commonwealth,* against Odger, Cremer, Howell, etc.; secondly, against Fox, with whom I had been on very friendly terms[3] and lastly, against Hales during the period when you were General Secretary.

If conflicts occurred later on, it would be important to establish *who* was responsible for them. I have only attacked you twice.

*Firstly,* on account of the premature publication of the Conference resolutions, in which, as you are well aware, you exceeded your brief.[4]

*Secondly,* because of the last skirmish with America where you caused great MISCHIEF. (I am leaving out of account here the fact that your actions brought such abuse from the AMERICAN PAPERS, aided and abetted by Karl Heinzen et Co., down on my head; I am just as impervious to this abuse as I had previously been to praise, both public and private, from the same source.)

You appear to imagine, however, that when you make BLUNDERS others must pay you compliments in return, instead of telling you the truth as one would to anyone else. I shall give you back Gregory's stuff tomorrow evening.[5] Today I have to go through the French and German proofs[6] simultaneously, so have no time to look through the American papers.

As for my 'INDICTMENT', I shall simply confine myself to proving that 1. you were absolutely in the wrong to write to New York in the way that you wrote, *at such a decisive moment,* even supposing that your GRIEVANCES were justified, and 2. that your complaint about the suppression of papers vis-à-vis the General Council is absolutely without foundation. *Voilà tout[7] *

Finally, let me give you some good advice. You must not think that old personal and party friends are or will be less well disposed towards you just because they see it as their duty to oppose your FREAKS. On the other hand, you should not imagine that the small clique of Englishmen who make use of you for certain purposes are your friends. I could prove the contrary if I wished.

And so *salut* Since it is my birthday the day after tomorrow I have absolutely no desire to celebrate it in the unpleasant conviction that I have lost one of my oldest friends and like-minded comrades.

*Salut fraternel,*

Karl Marx