---
id: MECW44-162
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, November 17, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "17 November 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT[1]

IN LEIPZIG

London, 17 November 1871

1 Maitland Park Road,

Haverstock Hill

Dear Liebknecht,

1. Letter to follow concerning the printing of the Rules,[2] etc.

2. Your comments on my proposals concerning Berlin rest on a complete misunderstanding. I declared my opposition to unprovoked demonstrations, but pointed to 'provocations', and imminent ones at that, which would provide demonstrations with a background and with prospects of success.[3]

3. First Bebel and yourself do not come to the Conference, and take no steps to ensure that other delegates turn up. Then you print a report from Boruttau in which, acting perhaps as an *unconscious* agent of the Geneva conspiracy against the General Council, he rebukes the latter for failing to invite delegates from Germany.[4] The construction already being put upon this in Geneva by the Bakuninists and the whole host of conspiratorial hangers-on among the émigrés, is that Marx has lost his influence even in Germany!

4. You may rest assured that I am better informed than you about the intrigues within the International. So when I write to you that letters from Boruttau with *any bearing at all* on the International (including the *Manifesto* already announced, which the aforesaid Boruttau has sent you) should not be printed in the *Volksstaat,* you have simply to make up your mind whether you wish to act *against* us or *with* us. If the latter is the case, then my instructions, which are based on a thorough knowledge of the circumstances, should be followed to the letter.

5. Since we are most dissatisfied here with the way in which the affairs of the International have been conducted hitherto, it is my duty, in accordance with the instructions of the General Council, to make direct contact with the main centres in Germany. I have already made a start on this.[5]

6. We are so overwhelmed with International WORK here that Engels and myself have had no time up to now to write a Preface for the *Communist Manifesto.*^9 At all events we shall not write one simply in order to trigger off a polemic with Mr Boruttau in the *Volksstaat.*

Your

K. M.