---
id: MECW44-008
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, July 29, 1870"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "29 July 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

[London,] 29 July 1870

Dear Library,[1]

Enclosed an extract from the Manifesto of the General Council taken from *The Pall Mall Gazette* of 28 July.[2]

Be so good as to insert a note in your *translation* in the *Volksstaat* that you received the Manifesto in *English.* This will indicate to our other correspondents that we had no time to send them translations.

Last Tuesday[3] I translated the Reichstag protest of Bebel and yourself into English for the General Council. It was received with great acclamation.[4]

One further matter. Mr Karl Blind made a patriotic speech to a German meeting in the Sports Hall; this comedian represented as a vital, world-shaking event the fact that he, the German Brutus, had suspended his republicanism, sacrificing it on the altar of the fatherland for the duration of the war. That was Act I.

*Act II:* Karl Blind gives an account in his own hand in the London *Deutsche Post* of that same meeting, whose size, importance, etc., he exaggerates in his usual manner.

*Act III:* Karl Blind writes an *anonymous* letter[5] to *The Daily News,* in which he movingly depicts the overwhelming impact on the whole of Germany of the great speech made by *Karl Blind* at the meeting in the Sports Hall. All the German papers, he claims, have reproduced it. One of them, the Berlin *Volks-Zeitung,* even *ventured* (!) to print it in its entirety. (The fellow is a correspondent of the *Volks-Zeitung.*) Neither did Viennese papers allow the great event to pass them by without trace. (The fellow sent in a report himself to the *Neue Freie Presse.*)

This is just one of a thousand instances in which this ant-lion strives to gull the English into believing that he is a sort of German Mazzini.

*Salut*

Your

K. M.