---
id: MECW44-199
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Jozewicz, February 24, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 February 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in *Die Gesellschaft,* No. 3, Berlin, 1933 Published in English for the first time in: Karl Marx, *On the First International* Arranged and edited, with an introduction and new transla"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FERDINAND JOZEWICZ[1]

IN BERLIN

[London,] 24 February 1872

Citizen Secretary,

I can only write a few words today. Because of the conspiracy of the 'international police' with certain *faux frères*[2] within the International, the General Council has heaped so many tasks upon me that I have even been compelled to put aside my theoretical work. So to business:

1. A resolution of the General Council, based on the four- month-long delay in printing the stamps (itself due to unforeseen obstacles in London), has set back the date by which unsold stamps should be returned from *1 March* to *1 July.* (Be kind enough to inform Liebknecht of this since I have no time to write to him at present.)

2. As far as double payment for the stamps is concerned, you have only to state in your report on 1 July that such-and-such a proportion of the money being forwarded stems from that source.

3. As far as the 'corresponding secretary' is concerned, the General Council leaves it to the Berlin section to arrange the matter as it thinks fit.

4. The Berlin section falls into the category of countries where 'legal obstacles' exist to regular organisation and in such countries the sections have absolute freedom to constitute themselves in a manner appropriate to the law of the land, without thereby forfeiting *any right* possessed by the other sections.[3]

5. The next Congress will be held in September 1872. The General Council has not yet decided on a location for the gathering.[4] The Social-Democratic Party would be well-advised to let us know without delay when they intend to hold their Congress.

6. The periodic reports of the General Council have been replaced by its weekly reports in *The Eastern Post,* the first despatch of which you will receive today.

6.[5] The *Volksstaat* is one of the organs in question.

7. The General Council thanks the Berlin section for having already appointed a statistical commission.

8. The Council enquires through me in what relationship the *Hamburgers* (i.e. the Committee of the Social-Democratic Party)[6] stand towards the General Council. Up to now we have not had a word from them.

9. The General Council requests the Berlin section to declare its approval of the resolutions of the last Conference of delegates of the International (in London).[7]

With fraternal greetings,

K. M.