---
id: MECW44-125
title: "Letter to Friedrich Bolte, August 25, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "25 August 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the book Pub"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FRIEDRICH BOLTE

IN NEW YORK

Brighton, 25 August 1871

Dear Mr Bolte,

I have been here for about two weeks, sent by the doctor because my health was very much impaired as a result of overwork. I shall probably return to London next week, however.[1]

Next week you will receive an Appeal by the General Council for the refugee Communards.[2] Most of them are *in London* (over 80 to 90 by now). The General Council has kept them above water up to now, but in the past two weeks our funds have been melting away just like that, while the number of arrivals increases daily, so that they are in a very deplorable condition. I hope that everything possible will be done from New York. In Germany all the resources of the party are still absorbed by the victims of the police persecution there, as is the case in Austria, ditto Spain and Italy. In Switzerland they not only have a part of the refugees themselves to support, albeit a small part, but they also have to aid the members of the International as a result of the St Gallen LOCKOUT.[3] Lastly, there are also some refugees in Belgium, though only a few and, what is more, the Belgians have to aid them, particularly in getting them through to London.

Owing to these circumstances, up to the present all the funds for the bulk of the refugees in London have been raised exclusively in England.

The *General Council* now includes the following members of the Commune: Serraillier, Vaillant, Theisz, Longuet and Frankel, and the *following agents of the Commune:* Delahaye, Rochat, Bastelica and Chalain.

I have sent *The New-York Herald* a statement in which I disclaim all responsibility for its correspondent's absurd and wholly distorted report of his conversation with me.[4] I do not know whether it has printed the statement.

Give Sorge my regards. I shall answer his letter next week.[5]

Faithfully yours,

Karl Marx