---
id: MECW44-098
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, July 10, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 July 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. 1 (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

[London,] 10 July 1871

Dear Liebknecht,

Herewith the rest of Section III.[1] Section IV will follow in 2-3 days, and at all events by the end of the week.[2] The proofs today or tomorrow.

*Ad vocem*[3] deportation,[4] the examples you give of deportations from Prussia and Mainz will not hold water, because they took place in wartime and so were legal. You ought by some means or other to force a decision on the cases in Saxony: either by the refusal of those involved to leave, or by appeal and petition to the Reichstag. The Party of Progress cannot refuse you support on this matter without ruining itself totally.[5] As long as the Reichstag does not explicitly refuse to recognise the rights of citizenship and the freedom to live and move where one likes, the issue is not settled. As to your particular case, you could have brought it to the boil very quickly by going to Berlin 8 days before the opening of the Reichstag and waiting to see what happened. I am convinced that they would not have touched you, and that would have been the end of it. If they had made a move against you, there would have been a fearful outcry and they would have had to release you as soon as the Reichstag convened; you would then have been able to expose the Reichstag in the eyes of the entire world if they had not behaved properly. There are certain decencies that even the most wretched assembly cannot openly violate in untroubled times. However, now that you are no longer in the Reichstag, it is no longer so simple. But if you allow all these rights that you possess on paper to be taken from you in reality *without any sort of struggle,* and if you do not *force* the Reichstag to decide publicly for or against its own creation, then there is no helping you.

The imperious tone in which you demanded that we should found a paper here amused us hugely. You must have confused London with Crimmitschau to have imagined that one can just go ahead and establish a *Bürger- und Bauernfreund* here without more ado.[6] You surely ought still to be aware that just as London is larger than Crimmitschau so too the difficulties in setting up a paper and all the demands made of it are correspondingly greater. If you can put some £10,000 at our disposal, we shall be at your service.

*Ad vocem* Odger, you forget that the man was elected by the *Congress* and could not be expelled without a valid reason.[7] From what you say on this point it is quite clear that you have completely lost touch with the situation here, which is not surprising since the papers maintain a total silence about events within the workers' party.

We have now thoroughly and definitively broken off relations with *The Pall Mall Gazette.*

Best regards to you and yours from my wife[8] and the Marx family.

Your

F. E.