---
id: MECW44-294
title: "Letter to Johann Philipp Becker, April 7, 1873"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 April 1873"
year: 1873
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow, 1935. Printed according to the original. Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collecte"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER[1]

IN GENEVA

[London,] 7 April 1873

Dear Becker,

If I do not manage to write to you in detail, you must put the blame on my overwork. I shall have no spare time available until the French translation[2] is finished and the last page has been printed.[3] As for the 2nd German edition," I was glad to send off the last of the proof-sheets the day before yesterday, and have instructed Meissner to send you the whole-volume edition *post-free,* which is due out in about a week.[4] You would oblige me by letting me know when it comes.

Engels asks you to forward the enclosed letter to Goegg)[5] as soon as possible. It is to do with some information about the Alliance (we are at present engaged in assembling documentary evidence with which to demolish them[6]. Might I also ask you to send us, if at all possible, *the first programme of the public Alliance in Geneva?* in which your name appeared among others.

We thought that the *Égalité* of Geneva must have folded up as we had not seen a copy since Outine's departure from Geneva. At his request I had induced some French friends to become correspondents for it, but our belief in its demise put a stop to everything. So if Perret wishes for reports from here, he must make sure that Engels (122 Regent's Park Road) and myself each receive a copy. We shall pay for it if he so desires.

The General Council will likely decide on Geneva as the venue for the next Congress.[7] You must even now start working to ensure a large attendance. This is all the more indispensable as the Alliancist band of rogues is planning to turn up *en masse.* Of course, they must not be allowed in. The Hague Congress[8] must have brought us at least *the one* advantage that the rabble will be removed from our midst. But for that it is essential for us to have completely reliable local representatives at our disposal.

With best wishes from the whole family.

Your

Karl Marx