---
id: MECW44-184
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, January 18, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "18 January 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 18 January 1872[1]

Dear Liebknecht,

The facts about the Belgians are these: De Paepe is the only one who is worth anything, but he is not very active. Steens is a jackass, a schemer and perhaps worse, and Hins is a Proudhonist who by that very fact, but even more because of his Russian wife, has leanings towards Bakunin. The others are puppets. On the other hand, the Belgian workers show no inclination to spark off a rebellion in the International. Hence the bad grace evident in the formulation of the resolution.[2] Fortunately, Mr Hins has been the victim of his own super-smartness, for the workers' papers, which have not been able to look behind the scenes, interpret the resolution *literally* and so read it as a declaration *in our favour.* E.g. the *Tagwacht* and the *Emancipation* in Madrid,[3] etc.

Conference resolutions[4] have no necessary binding force, since a conference is, in itself, an illegal mechanism, justified only by the gravity of the situation. Hence recognition is always desi- rable.

It would be good if you were to follow the lead of the *Tagwacht* and interpret the Belgian resolution as indicated above, adding that the resolution about revising the Rules amounts to a rejection of the Bakuninist call for an *immediate* congress. This is implicit because the revision would first have to be debated at *their* congress in June and only after that could it be brought before the regular congress of the International, which could not be held before the regular time scheduled in September. You could further remark that if the Belgians imagined that the General Council was nothing more than a correspondence bureau, they must have forgotten the Basle resolutions,[5] which are of an entirely different nature and which at all events remain in force until they are revoked by a regular International congress.

Up to now we intend to convene the congress at the regular

time. It is still early to decide on the place, but it almost certainly will not be Switzerland, or Germany for that matter.[6]

I have received *one* copy of the issue of the *Volksstaat* with my article,[7] and of the next issue *nothing at all* Marx received the next, but not the one with my article! No doubt a mix-up in despatching them. Send me *half a dozen copies* of No. 3 and one of No. 4 *by return.* I need several for correspondents in Italy who can read German, etc.

Warmest thanks from Marx for your discretion in sending the *Neuer Social-Demokrat* which, without preparation and before any counter-action had been initiated, would only have upset his wife unnecessarily. The Workers' Society![8] will reply and send its answer to the *Volksstaat;* there will be also a reply to Schneider's article.[9] In the meantime, I enclose an item which is unlikely to give the gentlemen any pleasure.[10] *Apropos* the Workers' Society, there have been some funny goings-on there, too.[11] Schneider and that asinine old scoundrel, Scherzer, thought they had got a majority, and together with Weber, who acted as intermediary, they made common cause with the dissident French and then proposed that the Society should *resign from the International.* Our people had become lax, had squandered their advantage and admitted far too much riff-raff. But this time things had gone too far. They were called out in force and the proposal was defeated by 27 votes to 20. A motion to expel the 20 was then tabled. The disorder made a vote impossible. Whereupon our people im- mediately salvaged all the Society's property, moved to another pub and expelled the 20. The rebels are now out in the cold and don't know what to do, but they had the impertinence to send Scherzer as *their delegate* to the General Council on Tuesday[12] Naturally, he was not admitted.

The alliance of the ultra-federalist French with the ultra- centralist Germans is likewise no bad thing.[13] Moreover, these French are already completely divided. When Vésinier was elected secretary, Theisz, Avrial et Co. resigned (for the *second* time). The remnant has split into two bodies, one of which is led by the nose by Vésinier, the other by Vermersch (of the *Père Duchêne,* and here the editor of the *Qui Vive!* and at present of the *Vermersch Journal).* Personally and politically, the two are equally disreputable and at least 3 others are more than suspected of being spies. The French police have so overshot the mark with

their cunning that their *mouchards*[14] now only spend their time spying on *each other.*

The news about the Saxons' resolution gave us great pleasure. We shall see to publication in the appropriate form.[15] Letters about INDIVIDUAL MEMBERS have not yet arrived.[16]

To your questions:

1. The [membership] cards have been superseded by stamps following the resolution.[17]

2. The stamps were to have been ready yesterday at Jung's and in any case will be available by the time you reply, so that we are just waiting to hear from you *how many you need.* We shall be sure to send them off to you.

3. You should have given us the names or addresses of the Italian Freethinkers at once. *Everyone* we have contact with in Italy is a Freethinker. I assume you are referring to Stefanoni in Florence; he is an industrialist, a Bakuninist and—the founder of a rival international Freethinking, socialist society.[18]

There is no urgency about Marx's second
anti-Proudhon edition.[19] It is much more important for *Capital* to appear in French,[20] and that will not be long in coming now. Negotiations are pending. It would be better *not* to say anything about the second edition of *Capital*[21] since the remaining copies of the first edition have still to be disposed of and it would be better for this bomb to strike the Roschers, Fauchers & Co. unawares.

Marx has said nothing to me about printing the essay on Proudhon from the *Social-Demokrat.*[22] If I do not write anything to the contrary within a day or so, go ahead and print it.

Sorge is a BUSYBODY who forgets that correspondence between here and New York takes 3 weeks, and that the General Council has other things on its mind apart from the American squabbles. Had they only waited just 1 day before staging their *coup d'état,*[23]

they would have had the answer from here, which would have rendered it superfluous. First, they admit a mass of unknown riff-raff in an incredibly casual fashion, and then, when the balloon goes up, we have to extricate them from the mess!

Goegg was here a few days ago. He really has improved greatly, and has progressed roughly to the stage reached by the German artisans in 1848. But from petty bourgeois to artisan is a real step forward. It is at least possible to talk to him now, a thing which

was quite out of the question 4 years ago. He says that my article[24] killed Vogt stone-dead, and appears in general to be of the opinion that we were always in the right about him. It is quite possible that he may develop even further in time, or rather, that he may be developed by the course of events.

The news from Spain is good as far as it concerns the Federal Council. There is still a lot of intrigue going on in Barcelona and there is a strong Bakuninist influence in the *Federation,* but since in Spain the matter will be discussed by the *Congress* (in April)[25]

and since workers are in the majority there rather than lawyers and doctors, etc., I surmise that all will be well. Lafargue is fortunately still in Madrid; the information about the *Neuer Social-Demokrat* comes from
him.[26] Mesa, the editor of
the *Emancipacion,* is completely on our side.

In Italy we have *Cuno* in Milan, a Swiss engineer who knows Bebel and yourself and who up to now has blocked any Bakuninist resolutions there—apart from that, there are either Bakuninists or people who hang back. It is very difficult terrain and gives me a fiendish amount of work.

I enclose reports of 2 meetings;[27] together with a polemic against Bradlaugh[28] furthermore the circular of Sonvillier[29] in case you do not have it.

Best regards from us all to you and yours.

Your

F. E.