---
id: MECW44-195
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, February 15, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "15 February 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 15 February 1872

Dear Liebknecht,

Letters from Germany about enrolment *are still not forthcoming.*[1] If the dear Germans again will not go beyond promises and fine phrases, we shall never get anywhere with them.

I cannot procure for you the data about the POOR-RATES[2] for the moment. We are being kept busy by the reply[3] to the Jura circular,[4] which is very urgent, and local statistics are the sort of thing one must collect oneself from the sources. For the time being, do *not* mention the reply to the Jurassians in public.

You will be aware that Albert Richard and Gaspard Blanc were the chief supporters of Bakunin & Co. (see the report on the last meeting).

[5]

Re the *Misere de la philosophie,* steps will be taken soon. Marx has signed the contract for the French translation of *Capital* and it will soon start to appear in *instalments.* (Between ourselves for the time being).[6] As soon as some have come out, it will be the turn of the *Misère de la philosophie.*

The *Manifesto* will follow, in German and probably in French and English (having appeared in an English and a French periodical in New York). You see that things are in full swing here. But it all makes for a lot of work.

The Lassalleans here have been thrown out, as you know. If they go on kicking up a fuss in the *Neuer Social-Demokrat,* send us the paper when you have finished with it—it doesn't get sent to the Workers' Educational Society[7] anymore. The Lassallean gentlemen here had the impertinence to go on behaving as if they were 'The Society' and sent Scherzer as their delegate to the General Council, where he was turned back without further ado.

You will have received the 800-odd STAMPS from Marx. You stick them on the top of the back of the title leaf of the Rules, of which, I hope, we shall soon receive the 3,000 copies, together with the bill? Cf. the relevant Conference resolution, which is clear enough.[8]

Enclosed find a Prussian loan-certificate for 10 thalers in settlement of the accompanying invoice, for which I should like a receipt. Use the balance as you think fit.

Furthermore, 4 reports on meetings^1 from *The Eastern Post* and a few lines to Hepner.[9]

Cuno is behaving very courageously but has lost his job and is in a very bad way.[10]

I had guessed that your Italian could only be Stefanoni. Now just pay attention to this:

1. *Libero Pensiero* No. 18, 2 November 1871. Programme of the *Società Universale dei Razionalisti,* setting up a rival association to the International. According to its programme rationalist *monasteries* are to be established, a colossal sum of money to be invested in land is to be amassed and a *marble* bust *of every bourgeois* who donates 10,000 francs to the society is to be placed in the congress hall.[11]

2. There follow, in Nos. 20 & 21, increasingly virulent attacks on the International for repudiating atheism, as conceived by the[12][13] Alliance, and on the General Council for its tyrannical ways, etc.

3. After an interval, this is followed in No. 1 of 4 January 1872 by a lengthy abusive article about the General Council, in which *all the slanders of Schneider* and *Weber* from the *Neuer Social-Demokrat*[14] *appear in translation* and are accompanied by equally outrageous commentaries, e.g. on the Communist trial.

4. This is followed in No. 3 of 18 January by *a letter from Wilhelm Liebknecht* of 28 December, in which the latter promises help to Stefanoni and offers to publish his contributions and to lend his support, without seeing it, to the programme of this honest society at the Saxon provincial assembly.^4

5. This is followed in No. 4 of 25 January by another abusive article about the General Council in which the slanderous allegations about Marx by Messrs *Schenck and Winand are once more translated* from the *Neuer.*[15]

You can see in what fine company you have involved yourself with your letter-writing. Stefanoni, behind whom none other than Bakunin (who supplied him with all this material) is concealed, has *just used you as a tool* He has used Feuerbach in the same way, having published one of his letters too. Büchner, of course, is also conspiring with Stefanoni against us. This is what happens when you take up with people you do not know, when a simple enquiry, or even the mere mention of a name, would have sufficed for us to give you the necessary information and to prevent you from compromising yourself in this way. As things stand you have no option but to write Stefanoni a *brief* rude letter, sending him the relevant numbers of the *Volksstaat* However, since Stefanoni will take good care not to print your letter, you must send me a copy so that I can translate it and see that it appears in the Italian press, for even the Bakuninist papers are at loggerheads with him. However, if you wish us to continue to be able to come out with you and on your behalf abroad, the first precondition is that you do not continue to make things difficult for us by writing such letters to unknown people.

The people in Spain have their hands full with their struggle against the government, and are much too busy to quarrel with us anymore.

The Marx family and all of us send best wishes to you all, especially to Bebel.

Your

F. E.

[16]

Lafargue and Laura are in Madrid and intend to stay there for the time being.