---
id: MECW44-132
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 8, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 September 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN RAMSGATE

[London,] 8 September 1871

Dear FRED,

Allsop's address is *Pegwell Bay.* No number has been given nor is it needed. EVERYBODY WILL TELL YOU THE WHEREABOUTS OF Pegwell Bay. It is a good thing that you can speak to him since he is coming to London on Tuesday[1] with the money and has invited me to come and see him there. I have written to him at length and made it clear that I can only continue TO BE THE *aumônier* OF HIMSELF AND his FRIENDS if I am allowed complete freedom of action AND am NOT BOTHERED WITH THE DEMAND TO PRODUCE LISTS OF THE DIFFERENT DEGREES OF DISTRESS of the refugees.[2]

What do you think of our honourable Favre? The lousy London press now has to report its own disgrace by telegraph.

Last Monday *L'Avenir liberal*—*journal bonapartiste, publié à Paris*—reported my death.[3]

In consequence we have received a number of letters; among others, Dronke wrote to my wife today, and Imandt too sent the *Dundee Advertiser* which contained the same nonsense. À *demain*[4] CALL UPON ME AFTER YOUR ARRIVAL AT LONDON. Regards to the WHOLE FAMILY.

Your

K. M.

Rochat does a splendid imitation of Frankel's French.

*The Evening Standard* of 6 September *only published the letter to the EDITOR,* adding the note: 'WE HAVE RECEIVED NO ENCLOSURE.'

I did not see the stuff until yesterday. Since the letters to the fellows were in your handwriting[5] I got my wife to write to them at once in her own name, on the pretext that I was out of London for a few days. She has sent the *Public Opinion* (and REGISTERED the letter), and demanded that it be printed together with an *apologie,* under threat of legal proceedings. She put in an 'old' card with it, which reads: 'Mme Jenny Marx, née Baronesse de Westphalen', which will be bound to put fear into those Tories.