---
id: MECW44-269
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, November 2, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "2 November 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published abridged in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906, and in full in: Marx an"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 2 November 1872

122 Regent's Park Road

Dear Sorge,

Enclosed is my report on Spain.[1]

I have just been asked to inform the General Council officially of the formation of the following two sections:

1. Associazione degli opérai e degli agricoltori della Bassa Lombardia (Sezione di Lodi), Enrico Bignami, Via Cavour 19 (secretary).

2. Consociazione dei liberi Lavoratori Abruzzesi (Sezione di Aquila, in the province of the same name. Correspondence via Lodi for the moment).

The announcement comes from Bignami, who also states that both have adopted Rules that conform to the General Rules. I shall ask for copies and send them to you.[2]

Bignami is the only fellow in Italy to have taken our side, even though not very vigorously up to now. In his paper, *La Plebe,* he has printed not only my report on the Hague Congress[3] but also my much more outspoken private letter to him.[4] Since I have to send him news reports, the paper remains in our hands. In addition, he has had the General Rules reprinted with the Hague amendments and also my Congress report. He is surrounded by the autonomists and so still has to act circumspectly.

I hear nothing from Turin any more. In Milan Cuno must find at least one contact for us so that we at least get reports. We hear from Ferrara via Lodi; the section was established by Bignami.

Marx asks me to tell you that *at the moment* the minutes[5] are still absolutely necessary here. In view of the lies that Hales, Mottershead and Eccarius are spreading here, as well as those of the Jurassians, etc., on the Continent, it may turn out any day that we need to reply in the form of extracts from these minutes. For you, on the other hand, they can easily be dispensed with for the time being. We are making a copy of the parts with the administrative resolutions together with their motivation and shall send it to you.

To be on the safe side I am again giving you the addresses for Spain, Italy and Portugal. If you have accepted the post, I think it is very sensible to have a *single* corresponding general secretary, who will only co-opt assistants for *languages.*[6]

Best regards to you all.

Your

F. Engels

José Mesa y Leompart, Calle de San Pedro No. 16, 3° (3rd floor), Madrid.

Spanish, Federal Council: In a double envelope (the inner one to be addressed to Francisco Tomas) to Don Julian Valero, Calle de Sorolla 35, Valencia.

Lisbon: Signor Dom J. C. Nobre-França, Travessa do Abarracamento de Péniche No. 4, 2° andar (2nd floor), Lisboa.

Turin: Inner envelope: Cesare Bert, Secretary of the local section. Outer: Monsieur J. J. Goss, Concierge de l'église évangélique, No. 1, Via Principe Tommaso, Turin.

Turin, alternative address: Luigi Perrini, Viale del Rè 21 (without inner envelope, he is an old member).

Report on Italy to follow—on Portugal Lafargue is translating the report sent from there to the Congress.

I am just revising the *French* translation of the *Manifesto;* the handwritten version that has been brought is quite good in the main, in so far as *Woodhull* was good.[7]