---
id: MECW44-205
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, March 8, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 March 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the original"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 8 March 1872

33 Rathbone Place, W.C.[1]

Dear Sorge,

Have only received today the *German Rules*[2] sent by Liebknecht and they cannot be sent off until *Monday*[3] Over there people seem to imagine that the General Council just conjures up everything out of a hat, whereas the contrary is the case: without the private contributions of its members and their personal friends, *absolutely nothing* could be done. I notice the same comments in letters from Speyer, Boite and yourself, as I do in correspondence from other countries. Every country believes that our entire time can be devoted to it alone. If we wanted to grumble about every single detail, we could, e.g., complain that your REPORTS to us appear simultaneously in the *Volksstaat.*

Since I was commissioned by the General Council at long last to report on the SPLIT in America[4] (the matter had had to be postponed from one meeting to the next on account of the chaos within the International in Europe)—I have carefully gone through all the correspondence from New York together with everything that appeared in the papers and have discovered that we were by no means duly informed in time about the elements that brought about the breach. A portion of the resolutions I have proposed[5] has already been accepted, the rest will be passed next Tuesday[6] and the final judgment will then be sent off to New York.

You will receive 1,000 copies of the German Rules. Hales will send 500 in English. I am sending 200 French ones, which have all been ordered.

Eccarius says that the things were sent to Gregory[7] (his private correspondent) because you had written to him that you were resigning from office but had not named a new correspondent.

The complaint about the French having their 'own' correspondent is quite unjust,[8] since the Germans also had one of their own and Eccarius, the SECRETARY for the UNITED STATES, can certainly deal with correspondence in German and English, but not in French. Moreover, the complaint was politically ill-advised, since it seemed to justify the view of the French members of the COUNCIL that Section I aspired to dictatorial authority over the other sections.[9] It arrived here at the same time as the complaint from the COUNTER-COMMITTEE that Section I was represented on the old committee in numbers exceeding those stipulated by the Rules.

The cost of the Rules was higher for the COUNTER-COMMITTEE because import duties had to be paid (at least, that is what they maintain).

I hope that your committee will be satisfied with the decision of the COUNCIL. We are having a pamphlet against the DISSENTERS[10] printed in Geneva, which will be almost as big as the one on the *CIVIL WAR.* In the meantime the dissenters have drawn in their horns in their last circular, so as to dull the polemic.[11]

IN ALL HASTE.

Yours,

K. Marx