---
id: MECW44-263
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, October 5, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 October 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published abridged in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906, and in full in: Marx and"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 5 October 1872

122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Dear Sorge,

*On vous taille de la besogne.*[1] Enclosed the French translation (because the wording can be done most literally in that language) of 2 articles from the *Federation* (Alerini's paper).[2] However, the Belgians are not really so terrifying. According to letters received subsequently they have already taken fright at their own boldness and do not know how to extricate themselves; in addition the disorganisation in the International in Belgium increases daily, which is very useful in view of the need to re-organise every- thing.

In contrast, you cannot simply ignore the resolutions of the Jurassians which, having been passed by a Federal Congress, amount to an open declaration of war.[3] *Le Conseil général est tenu d'exécuter les résolutions du Congrès*[4] (Geneva Resolution). We wrote off to Geneva at once for the latest *Bulletin jurassien* and shall send it to you as soon as it arrives. In addition, you could if you want write directly to the *Comité Fédéral Jurassien* (address: Adhémar Schwitzguébel, graveur, Sonvillier, Jura Bernois, Suisse) and ask for information.

It is a very good thing that these gentlemen have openly declared war and thus given us a sufficient reason to show them the door. After this open declaration it is impossible for a majority of the federations to demand that the matter be brought before a Congress[5] especially since *at most* 4 would vote in favour (they themselves, the Spaniards, Belgians and Dutch), while all the rest would be against. Swift, vigorous action against these eternal troublemakers is, in our view, very much in place as soon as you have the evidence in your hands, and will probably suffice to disperse the threatened *Sonderbund.*[6]

Yesterday I sent you Nos. 65, 66 and 67 of the *Emancipation.* The fact that Guillaume had told Wilmart in Brussels that the Spaniards would re-establish the Alliance since now, after the Hague Congress, it was more necessary than ever, was report- ed by Wilmart himself in a letter to Lafargue (which I have read).

I had intended to enclose the report on Spain, Portugal and Italy to the General Council[7] but will not have it ready in time for the post. However, I do enclose my report to Section 6,[8] which you can give to Bertrand.

Here Hales has launched a colossal slander campaign against Marx and myself, but it is rebounding on him without our having to lift a finger.[9] The pretext was Marx's statement about the corruptness of the English labour leaders. Some London sections and the whole of Manchester have protested most vigorously and Hales has lost his former majority in the FEDERAL COUNCIL, so that he will probably be thrown out entirely soon.

That damned Lucain has still not sent us the papers about the Alliance that he took with him, so we are still unable to make a start/ The documents subsequently received from Switzerland give a full account of the Nechayev trial[10] and include some Russian publications of Bakunin's. They are all highly interesting and will cause a fearful scandal. I have never seen such an infamous band of scoundrels in all my life.

[11][12]

My wife[13] discovered after your departure that Emma had accepted money from you for your laundry and asks me to tell you that this was done behind her back, for otherwise she would never have permitted it.

Do not forget the minutes of the mandate debate,;[14] since without them we cannot include that section in the minutes[15] no one here has anything on it.

With every post we are waiting for news from you and signs of life from the new General Council.

Best wishes to Cuno, I hope he will write soon. POOR Hepner has indeed been given 4 weeks gaol because the International is prohibited in Leipzig!

Your

F. Engels