---
id: MECW44-224
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, May 15-22, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "15 May 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 15[-22] May 1872

Dear Liebknecht,

Thanks for the letter from Verviers.[1] It confirms our information from other sources and. as far as Hins is concerned, it is agreeable to learn that his preference for the *Neuer*[2] not only makes itself felt in the *Liberie* but is also expressed directly. In this Hins, as a Bakuninist thanks to his wife, is quite consistent. It is good that all the scoundrels should meet up with each other.

I passed on the relevant information to Eccarius, who replied: Tell Liebknecht that I shall discuss corresponding with him again once he has answered my letter of last July.—What Sorge writes to you[3] is at present the subject of charges levelled at Eccarius, who has lost much ground here thanks to his repeated indiscretions.

It goes without saying that nothing can be decided at present about the location of the Congress.[4]

I am delighted to hear that the *Volksstaat* is selling so well.[5] As soon as time permits I shall contribute articles more frequently, but you can have no idea how hard-pressed we are, because Marx, myself and 1 or 2 others have to do absolutely *everything.*

We shall attend to the Preface for the *Manifesto*;[6] at the first possible opportunity.[7] Marx has a terrific amount of work to do on the French translation[8] much has to be altered in the opening part.[9] And then he has also to read the proofs of the 2nd German edition.[10]

The article on the housing shortage[11] will be done today or tomorrow.

The *Fédération Jurassienne* publishes a swinish little paper: *Bulletin de la Fédération jurassienne,* subscription obtainable from Adhémar Schwitzguébel, Sonvillier, Jura Bernois, 4 frs per annum, 2 frs a half-year. You should take it and hit them hard from time to time, it is Bakunin's *Moniteur.* In the last issue Lafargue, who is in Madrid under an assumed name, was directly denounced to the Spanish police.[12]

Enclosed is a cutting from *The Eastern Post*—you will probably be sent the *first* edition, in which, thanks to Hales' indolence, the most important things are missing, as usual. If that is the case, drop me a couple of lines for the PUBLISHER SO that he can send you the *second* edition. Otherwise you will still be in the dark. What I said about the Saragossa Congress is accurate enough, but Lafargue forgot to tell us that at the same time a resolution had been passed recognising and adopting the resolutions of the *Belgian* Congress (of 25 December 1871).[13] So that the victory was by no means as complete as he described it to us.[14] I am awaiting further details about this last resolution.

That the Alliance has survived as a secret society, in Spain at least, is proved and recognised. Our own people were in it, because they knew no better and thought they had to be. This is a very serious matter for Mr Bakunin.

Don't forget to publish Lafargue's *2nd* report on the Saragossa Congress from the *Liberté.*[15] It has put the Jurassians into a fury and their last issue contains a public attack on Lafargue, myself, Marx and Serraillier. But they are as quiet as mice on the subject of the revelations about their *secret society. This is the tell-tale point* and so we must noise it abroad as much as possible. I am convinced that this secret organisation of the Alliance has branches in Switzerland and in Italy too. It will not be easy to obtain proof, however.—The next issue.of *Egalité* will include a statement by Lafargue against the Jurassians.[16]

22 May. In the interim I have been writing the enclosed article on housing. Your Proudhonist[17] will be satisfied with it.

I shall write to Wigand about my *Condition of the Working- Class.*[18] But there can be no question at all of my attending to it *before* the Congress is over; my hands are full until then.

The *Deutsch-Französische Jahrbücher* are unobtainable, except, perhaps, second-hand; that should be perfectly clear to you. The same goes for the *Misere de la philosophie* (although Vieweg in Paris, Frank's successor, may still have a few). A collection of essays is an old plan of ours but it also needs time. Mr Knapp will find sufficient instruction in *Capital;* once he has digested that he will doubtless know whether he is on our side or not, and if he still does not know, not even Moses and all the Prophets will be able to do anything for him. The crux of the matter is to be found in Chapters II and III of *Capital* and he should know where he stands on that before calling for further nourishment.

Your request for clarification about Proudhon should be satisfied for the moment by the enclosed article.

Enclosed the report on Spain in *The Eastern Post,*[19] which you are unlikely to have received. Please do *not* publish it. It was based on Lafargue's letters, but since the Jurassians are interpreting another resolution of the Congress in their own favour,[20] and since Lafargue's initial reports of victory were somewhat exaggerated in any event, it would be desirable for them *not* to circulate with a seal of approval from the General Council. I am not sending it to Italy or Spain either.

I shall now see what can be done about the Preface to the *Manifesto.* Marx is in the CITY checking on the quotation from the *Concordia;* those gentlemen have got a big surprise coming to them.[21]

Best wishes and hopes for a speedy quashing.

Your

F. E.

What view does the 'Committee' in Hamburg[22] take of the International? We must now try and clear up the situation there as quickly as possible so that Germany can be properly represented at the Congress.[23] I must ask you straight out to tell us frankly how the International stands with you.

1. Roughly how many stamps have been distributed to how many places, and *which places* are involved? The 208 counted by Fink[24] are surely not all there are?

2. Does the Social-Democratic Workers' Party intend to be represented at the Congress and IF SO how does it propose to place itself *en règle*[25] with the General Council in advance so that its mandate cannot be queried at the Congress? This would mean a) that it would have to declare itself to be the German Federation of the International in reality and not merely *figuratively* and b) that *as such* it would pay its dues before the Congress. The matter is becoming serious and we have to know where we are, or else you will force us to act on our own initiative and to consider the Social-Democratic Workers' Party as an alien body for whom the International has no significance. We cannot allow the representation of the German workers at the Congress to be fumbled or forfeited for reasons unknown to us, but which cannot be other than petty. We should like to ask for a clear statement about this quickly.

Receipt for Fink shortly. Notabene. It would perhaps be a good idea, if at all possible, to send me proofs of the article, but I leave it up to you. However, an essential prerequisite for my collaboration is 1) no marginal comments of any kind and 2) it must be printed in *long* instalments.