---
id: MECW44-221
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, May 7, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "7 May 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 7 May 1872

Dear Liebknecht,

I see now where your mistrust of Cuno stems from: you thought he was an agent of Becker's[1] who had come on a mission to lead the German International back into the arms of its mother-section in Geneva.[2] This was quite unnecessary. When Cuno was in Chemnitz,[3] he could have been enrolled as a member *there and then,* if you had not treated the International so platonically. In Milan, since he did not have our address, he turned to the only one known to him, that of Becker, and Becker, having admitted him, *directed him to us.* So just because Becker had once experienced the desire to annex Germany for himself, and because he may still intrigue a little here and there, you have to suspect every honest fellow who has had to turn to Becker because you were unwilling to act! I shall not believe your allegations about his boastfulness until I see proof; I have far less confidence in your correspondents in Nuremberg and elsewhere than I have in Cuno, who has never tried to pull the wool over our eyes, but has always reported more truthfully than most other people. Cuno's father is a Prussian official in Düsseldorf who simply threw him out; now he is stuck without a penny to his name. His possessions and those of his father are two different things altogether.

Enclosed an article by Lafargue from the *Emancipation;* you will have someone or other who knows enough Spanish to translate it.[4] Lafargue is doing a terrific amount of work in Spain and very skilfully too. The report from the *Liberté* on the congress in Saragossa was also by him. Incidentally, *do not forget to publish the second report, the one in the previous issue of the 'Liberté',* in which he unmasks the secret intrigues of the Bakuninists and describes the spectacular victory gained over them by our supporters there.[5]

This was the decisive defeat for that pig-headed Bakunin. The *Emancipation* is now the *best* paper we have. These Bakuninists are jackasses. The Spaniards have a very good organisation, one which has stood the test with flying colours precisely in the last 6 months, and now these fools come along and imagine that they can seduce people with their phrases about autonomy and get them to dissolve their organisation to all intents and purposes.

You ought to make more use of *The Eastern Post;* the information we make available there is truly of greater interest than the dogmatic legalistic waffle of Mr Acollas about the best of all possible constitutions.[6]

I still believe that the conviction will be quashed. In the first place, too many formal errors have been made, and secondly, the trial has already caused far too much of a rumpus.[7] Bismarck must surely perceive that he has gone too far and that quashing the sentence will be more advantageous for him than confirming it.

To the best of my knowledge, Stefanoni has not published your letter. I have not received all the issues of the *Libero Pensiero* and unfortunately your letter arrived in Italy at the very moment when *all* our papers I had sent it to folded up simultaneously. As for Büchner, you only need glance at his last would-be socialist production to see the envy and hatred the little cripple feels for Marx, whom he plunders and distorts without ever mentioning him by name.[8] And I stick to my belief that it is *he* who has filled Stefanoni's head with all that junk. That he is on good terms with *you* is something he shares with Malon and many others who cherish a mortal hatred for us.

I am sending you today's *Daily News* with a delightful account of the behaviour of the German professors and students in Alsace and the reception given them by the Alsatians. A description of the German student is enclosed.[9] Both reports are by Major Forbes, the same man who was with the Saxons before Paris and was, at the time, beside himself with admiration for the German officers and soldiers, i.e. if anything he is prejudiced *in favour* of the Germans. You should make use of these descriptions of the representatives of 'German culture'; they are striking proof as to how threadbare that 'culture' of the bourgeoisie has become, and how ludicrous its official spokesmen.[10]

As soon as I have time I shall write you an article on the housing shortage and against the absurd Proudhonist stories that have appeared in a series of articles on the subject in the *Volksstaat.[11] *

Our reply to the Jurassians[12] is still in the press. The devil take all these co-operative printers.

There *is* nothing to tell you about the Congress. *Where* it will take place can only be decided at the last moment.[13] *That* it will take place, you know already.

The arrest of our people in Denmark will be of enormous advantage to us and will not do much harm to the victims.[14] Denmark is not Saxony. Unfortunately, I do not know *who* has been arrested and so am forced to interrupt the correspondence.

The *Emancipation* now regularly publishes extracts from the *Volksstaat.* Laura is looking after it, so make sure that the paper is sent there regularly.

In Belgium the Brussels Federal Council has let everything go to rack and ruin; the two decent people we have there do not have sufficient energy to intervene. The workers in the provinces are much superior, but Brussels is the rottenest soil of all and as long as the centre is there it is unlikely that anything decent can develop. Hins has gone off to Verviers and since then the *Liberté* is much more accessible, so *that* is a positive gain.

Give our best wishes to your wife[15] and Bebel. You will have heard that Jenny Marx is engaged to Longuet. The first instalments of the 2nd edition of *Capital*[16] are due in the next few days and so is the French edition.[17] We have already seen the proofs.

Your

F. E.

What Lafargue says about Büchner is rubbish, of course. He is not sufficiently well informed about such details.