---
id: MECW44-225
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, May 23, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 May 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Published in English in full for "
status: raw
---

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE[1]

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 23 May 1872

Dear Sorge,

Just a few lines in great haste.

I am overwhelmed with work. Quite apart from all the International BUSINESS—everything is at sixes and sevens—every day I have to correct the *German proofs* of the second edition of *Capital* (which will appear in instalments)[2] and the *épreuves*[3] of the French translation[4] in Paris, which I often have to re-write completely to make matters clear to the French. And in addition I also have the *épreuves* of the *ADDRESS ON THE CIVIL WAR*[5] which we are bringing out in French in Brussels. You will be receiving a constant flow of instalments in German and French from me.

In Petersburg a splendid Russian translation[6] has appeared.[7]

The *Russian* socialist paper, *Die Neue Zeit* (its German title, the paper comes out in Russian), recently published a five-column-long leader lavishing praise on the book, which, however, was only meant as an introduction to a series of articles.[8] For this, the paper duly received a warning from the police, who threatened to suppress it.

I shall send Liebknecht my answer to the jackasses from the *Concordia* today.[9] I was unable to get round to it sooner. Moreover, it does no harm to leave that factory-owning mob their illusions of victory for a while.

AS TO HEINZEN, I CARE NOT ONE FARTHING FOR THE *faits et gestes*[10] OF THIS 'democratic numbskull'. He is the true representative of the 'KNOW-NOTHINGS', in the literal sense of the word.

It will do no harm to send me the French translation of the *Communist Manifesto.*[11]

I shall tell you in my next letter why the GENERAL COUNCIL is simply abiding by its resolutions[12] for the time being without proceeding in a more aggressive manner. We shall not continue to correspond with those people any more but have only instructed Le Moussu to ask them to return the letters from Eccarius (who has probably already given the *ordre* to print his letter over there) and Hales.[13]

*(Between ourselves.* Eccarius has been demoralised for quite some time now and is now a scoundrel pure and simple—*canaille,* even.)

In sincere friendship,

Karl Marx