---
id: MECW44-047
title: "Letter to Eugen Oswald, September 14, 1870"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 September 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964 Printed according to the typewritten copy Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected W"
status: raw
---

MARX TO EUGEN OSWALD

IN LONDON

[London,] 14 September 1870

Dear Oswald,

Enclosed are 50 COPIES of our new Address.[1] There are a few printing errors in it, but they do not distort the meaning. We shall correct them in the SECOND EDITION.

Our Central Committee for Germany (residing in Brunswick) issued a manifesto to the German workers on 5 September, opposing the ANNEXATION of Alsace and Lorraine and advocating the recognition of the French Republic, etc.[2] On the orders of Vogel von Falckenstein not only were the copies of the manifesto confiscated, but also *all the members of the Committee*—and the unfortunate printer,[3] were arrested INTO THE BARGAIN and transported *as a body* to Lötzen[4] in East Prussia.[5] I have immediately sent reports of the affair[6] to various London papers and shall see if they print them.

The victory in yesterday's meeting over the people who were partly *in the pay* of the PEACE SOCIETY, and partly unindoctrinated, was QUITE ACCIDENTAL. We were just holding the usual Tuesday meeting of the General Council of the International when our friends telegraphed from the Strand TO COME TO THE RESCUE since they would otherwise have been out-voted. And this is just what we did.[7]

You must forgive me for not answering sooner. I am so [overwhelmed] with INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS that, since my return,[8] I have been unable to get to bed before three in the morning.

Liebknecht has foolishly forgotten to give me a secret address. All letters sent direct to him are INTERCEPTED by the police.

I shall look out some copies of the *Volksstaat* for you, but I must have them back, together with those I have already given you, since I am collecting them.

Yours,

K. Marx