---
id: MECW44-331
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, around August 18, 1870"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: "Jenny von Westphalen"
written: "18 August 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

JENNY MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

Ramsgate [around 18 August 1870]
36 Hardres Street

Dear Mr Engels,

I am enclosing a letter from Lafargue which will certainly be of interest to you. It is the first time in ages that we have heard from them and so we now know that they do not intend to take part in the *siège.* That is *one* consolation at least. All the news from Paris is really frightful. If the *grrrande nation* had attacked at the right time, they would have been spared the *régime* of Eugénie?[1] and Palikao now. Isn't it scandalous that they simply continue to keep Rochefort in jail, the only intelligent politician among the whole of the *jeune France*[2] The fact is that they deserve the Prussian rod even more than one might have supposed.

I really am furious about the business with the house[3] and just do not know how you can get around the marquis. Perhaps a letter to MR Smith would be of more use than my personal intervention. He constantly shifts all the responsibility for the delay away from himself and onto the shoulders of the sub-agent. The whole affair is in a complete muddle.

Yesterday evening there was heavy rain here so that Moor could not go out for his evening walk. This morning the sun is shining splendidly again. I am convinced that the marvellous sea air here would help him to recover completely if only he didn't have this wretched rheumatism that keeps him from walking and sleeping. Last night, though, he had a much better time of it, and after lunch he again went to 'BYE-BYES' for a while, as we call the siestas. The girls are constantly by, in, near or on the sea and have red cheeks and even redder noses, but otherwise are very well and cheerful. Only both are suffering greatly on account of the DOWNBREAK of their favourite nations. Jenny is totally 'FRENCH' and Tussy 'IRISH'. And Pigott really has behaved like a madman. 'E. M.' is not Tussy. However, today she intends to send the ass an excerpt from the *Liberté* in which the French explicitly reject all assistance and enthusiasm on the part of the Irish, since they

would prefer after all to deal with the 'honest English'. That's the treatment they get from Bonapartist France. This is the thanks for their torchlight processions and demonstrations.

Warmest regards from us all and particularly from me to your dear wife.[4]

Yours,

Jenny Marx