---
id: MECW44-313
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 30, 1873"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "30 August 1873"
year: 1873
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913. Printed according to the original. Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collect"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN RAMSGATE

[London,] 30 August 1873

Dear FRED,

Your telegram[2] received; Serraillier arrived later on with *Perret's* letter to Days in his pocket.[3] I couldn't keep it for you because Days, who is secretary of the local FEDERAL COUNCIL, needs to report on it on Tuesday.[4] However, Serraillier has promised to make a *copie* of it for you. The letter is classical; the 'ILLIMITED' POWERS or rather **pouvoirs illimités** which the *La Haye* Congress[5]

granted to the GENERAL COUNCIL, must be withdrawn from it. On this point the *Genevois*—and ditto Mr Perret—are agreed; for then there is some hope that *des sections jurassiennes* will go over to them. For years now this same Perret has been writing that these SECTIONS would go over to them if only the GENERAL COUNCIL would proceed more energetically against the Jurassians! And of course everything is always looked at from the most bigoted and most parochial Swiss point of view. Furthermore, Frankel tells me that the same riff-raff are discontented with the resolutions passed at Olden, or whatever the place is called where the local Swiss congress met!^70s In the circumstances there can be absolutely no question of going to Geneva[6] on account of people like that, people who even refuse to accept mandates from English sections.[7]

I think you would do well to send a counter-order to Hepner without delay; he will still receive the *avis*[8] in time.

Yesterday, A FEW HOURS before I wrote to you, *je l'ai échappé belle*[9] and can still feel the effects in all my bones. I drank a spoonful of raspberry vinegar and some of it stuck in my wind-pipe. I had a terrible choking-fit, my face went quite black, etc. Another second or so and I would have departed this life. The first thing that occurred to me *post festum*[10] was whether it might not be possible to bring about such ACCIDENTS artificially. It would be the most decent and least suspicious method, and moreover a highly expeditious one, of doing away with oneself. It would be a great service to the English if one could recommend the experiment publicly.

Madame Longuet will arrive tomorrow, after all sorts of telegrams to and fro—it was very stormy in Boulogne.

*Aproposl* Lafargue and Le Moussu have *definitely split up.*[11] It took place—the separation, that is—when Le Moussu declared his willingness to do so since reluctance was in evidence on the other side. Le Moussu is now counting on you. I think the separation is a good thing and had become a necessity for both sides, since a lot of time was wasted in this war between the frogs and mice.[12]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

As for Serraillier, who couldn't work for a week because he was unwell and who would have lost ABOUT another two weeks with the Geneva trip,[13] I am very pleased that we have not given him any reason to accuse us later on of having ruined his whole business! You know *how, where* and *when* the Frenchman makes a habit of bringing to bear his 'working-class nature' against the 'bourgeois' in his own party.

Have received a letter from França.[14]