---
id: MECW44-250
title: "Letter to Theodor Cuno, August 4, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 August 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in *Die Gesellschaft,* No. 11, Berlin, 1925 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO THEODOR CUNO

IN LIÈGE

London, 4 August 1872

Dear Cuno,

The Belgian Federal Council could not have done us a greater favour than by taking action against the German section in Verviers.[1] By doing that it shows how necessary it is to have a General Council in order to defend the autonomy of the sections *against* the *Federal Councils.* The Belgian Federal Council, how- ever, cannot exclude the German section from the International, but only from the Belgian Federation:

'Administrative Regulations Section IV: Federal Councils or Committees, Article 4. Any Federation may refuse to admit or may exclude from its midst societies or branches. *It is, however, not empowered to deprive them of their International character.'*[2]

Thus as an independent section, the German section in Verviers has, under Art. 7 of the General Rules (end of the Article), the

right to correspond directly with the General Council. Please draw their attention to this fact and urge them to write to us; up to now nothing has arrived here.

Has Schlehbach in Verviers received my letter[3] and why does he not reply?

I am sending you an issue of the *Emancipaciôn* and a circular in Spanish by Lafargue (Marx's son-in-law)[4] and would like you to study it carefully. You will see from it what was at stake for Bakunin: a secret society within the International to gain control of the latter. Fortunately, the plan has now come to light and just in time. This business will break Bakunin's neck. The General Council will issue an Address devoted to it on Tuesday,[5] also indicting the Spanish Federal Council, which has 5 members of the Alliance sitting on it.[6]

In all haste—I have to edit this Address and have a terrible amount of other work for the International in preparation for the Congress.[7]

Yours,

F. E.

Tell Herman that I have looked around for work for him, but have not come up with anything yet. There is no point in going to Jackson & Sons after my last experiences there in February. Tell Herman to write to his friend Prigneaux here: he is the right man.