---
id: MECW44-014
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 3, 1870"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "3 August 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 August 1870

DEAR FRED,

The unfortunate Oswald has just left a moment ago—7 p.m., and although it is too late to catch the post, I shall write it all down since I do not know whether I might not be prevented by some diversion tomorrow.

The fellow with Blind was Prof. Goldstücker, an old-time National Liberal. The scene became very stormy.^0 Student Blind even *lied,* asserting that Dr Jacoby was on *his* side (this was for the benefit of the Frenchmen present). On departing the fellows let it be understood, not LITERALLY but by insinuation, that Oswald had been **bought** by Bonaparte.[1]

This threw POOR Oswald into convulsions. So he came to me. / should sign TO BACK HIM. OTHERWISE, HIS POSITION IN LONDON WOULD BE DANGEROUSLY DAMAGED. He brought a printed copy of the Address with him (just the page proofs).[2] I repeated to him *d'abord*[3] everything I had said previously. I then read the stuff through—feeble, verbose and—out of *courtoisie* to the Frenchmen negotiating with him—not a hint at the DEFENSIVE CHARACTER of the WAR on the part of the *GERMANS* (to say nothing of *PRUSSIA).* I then proposed that he should drop the whole thing as its effect could not be 'great', since, as I had told him before, in my answer to his first letter,[4] the *working class* alone could offer active resistance to the national swindle.

He answered: *d'abord,* a certain number of Frenchmen had already *signed* and Louis Blanc had declared that he would *lend his name* (a formula to indicate that he had had no part in composing the Address).

Second, if he did *not* publish it now, Blind would write the next day in the German papers that *he* had *prevented* the publication of this treasonable Address. It would be better to print it.

The last point is right. I must say that I felt sorry for the lad. So I gave him the following *ultimatum:*

I too would *lend my name* (and, like Louis Blanc, not actually subscribe) on these two conditions:

1. that a note would be *printed* under my name saying *'I agree with the above Address so far as its general sentiments coincide with the manifesto issued by the General Council of the "International Working Men's Association".'*[5]

2. that a sentence was added hinting at the DEFENSIVE CHARACTER of the WAR on the GERMAN side, if only in the most unobtrusive and tactful manner.

He accepted these conditions. The next day at 5 p.m. there would be another MEETING in his house, which I would attend.

He then said: Would Engels not sign too with *the same reservations* as myself?

I said it was a *London* Address. I was lending my name on certain conditions only out of courtesy to him and wholly against my critical judgment. I saw absolutely no reason why you too should compromise yourself because Oswald had made the mistake of involving ex-student Blind in the affair at all. And there the matter was left.

Incidentally, I had already written to Oswald since Sunday.[6] drawing his attention to another manoeuvre of Blind's.[7] / had read in the *Rappel* a correspondent's report from Frankfurt (quite rational for a change) in which the author was very anti-chauvinistic for a Frenchman. Nevertheless, he remarks *against* the Germans that the *Frankfurter Zeitung*[8] had printed a correspondent's report from London according to which the 'French republicans in London had invited *all* known German republicans to join in a common protest *contre cette guerre napoléonienne*[9] *The* German republicans had refused to do so because on the Prussian side the war was a defensive one.'

This was the work of the ex-student who constantly writes of, to, for and about Karl Blind and his deeds of heroism.

The *Pall Mall administration* sent me a cheque for 2 V2 guineas yesterday for the first ARTICLE ON WAR[10] (DURING JULY), with the comment that all correspondents are always paid at the end of the month. The younger *branche* of the Marx family consisting of the ferocious girl[11] and the illustrious Williams[12] have declared 'they should seize upon these first spoils of war as due to them for brokerage'. If you wish to protest, you should act quickly in view of the energetic nature of these 'neutrals'. I enclose a cutting from yesterday's *Pall Mall* in which they protest against *The Times'* plagiarism.[13] If the war lasts A CERTAIN TIME, you will soon be acknowledged as the *foremost military authority in London.*

Despite all the DRAWBACKS the *Pall Mall* has two advantages:

1. Of the respectable newspapers it is the only one which cultivates a certain *opposition to Russia.* This may become important as the war progresses.

2. As the GENTLEMEN'S PAPER *par excellence* it sets the fashion in all the *clubs,* and particularly the military ones.

3. It is the *only non-venal* paper in London.

*Apropos!* Buy a copy of the latest *London Illustrated News*[14] for the portrait of that scoundrel Brunnow. His face is the very incarnation of Russian diplomacy.

BY THE BY. Disraeli came out with that ridiculous guarantee of Prussian Saxony for Prussia in the Vienna Treaties, using it as the basis for an Anglo-Russian alliance. (He conveniently forgot that the independence of *Poland* was a condition for that guarantee on England's part.)[15] This was just a FEELER THROWN OUT. But the *Anglo-Russian alliance* is actually planned by Gladstone too. The ENGLISH MEMBERS of the *INTERNATIONAL* really must take energetic action on this. I shall send a letter to the COUNCIL about it FOR NEXT TUESDAY.[16]

The Belgians have proposed the congress be held in Amsterdam on 5 September. This is the plan of Mr Bakunin. The congress would consist *chiefly of his TOOLS.* I have proposed instead: *Appeal to all the sections whether they think not that, under present circumstances, where the French and German delegates would be excluded from the congress, power should be given to the General Council 1. to postpone the congress; 2. to enable the Council to convoke congress at the moment it shall consider opportune.* This was passed.^4

The matter was all the more pressing as we see from the open attack on us in the LAST *Solidarité* (using our decision on the *Swiss* matter as a pretext)[17] that Bakunin had taken all his precautionary measures for the Amsterdam Congress. He would have defeated us at the last *congress in Basle,* had it not been for the German element in Switzerland.[18]

Lopatin has moved to London from Brighton, where he was almost dying of boredom. He is the only 'reliable' Russian I have got to know up to now, and I shall soon succeed in driving his national prejudices out of him. I also learned from him that Bakunin had been spreading the rumour that I was an *agent of Bismarck*—*mirabile dictu*[19] *l* And, *c'est vraiment drôle,*[20] the same evening (last Tuesday, yesterday), Serraillier told me that Châtelain, MEMBER OF THE FRENCH BRANCH,[21] and a particular friend of Pyat, had even informed the FRENCH BRANCH IN FULL SITTING *how much* Bismarck had paid me—namely 250,000 francs. If, on the one hand, one is in the French habit of thinking in *francs* and if, on the other hand, one bears Prussian niggardliness in mind, then this is at least a very decent *estimatel Salut*

Your

K. M.