---
id: MECW44-010
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 1, 1870"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "1 August 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in full for the first t"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 1 August 1870

*In great haste*

DEAR FRED,

Your two last articles first-rate.[2] I galloped round to the *Pall Mall* at once. But since Greenwood was out, nothing could be decided. He will, however, be back before noon.

I shall write to him today that in future you will send articles direct to him 12 (I SHALL NOW NAME YOU).

As for the 'Russians',[3] they will learn that my attitude is one of à *corsaire corsaire et demi!*[4]

The OLIGARCHY here wants an English war on behalf of Prussia. Having curried favour with Bonaparte for 18 years and having quite used him up as the SAVIOUR OF RENTS AND PROFITS, they now hope to find A MORE RESPECTABLE AND SAFER POLICEMAN OF THE CONTINENT[5] in God-fearing monarchical Prussia. But the fellows should watch out. Ordinary people everywhere here are already saying: THAT DAMNED GERMAN DYNASTY OF OURS WANTS FOR ITS FAMILY PURPOSES TO INVOLVE US IN THE CONTINENTAL WAR!

The local *Figaro,* of which I have sent a typical issue to Dupont, is an *English* paper, founded by the French Embassy.

Bismarck for his part has also assiduously bought up support in the London press, *Lloyd's* and *Reynolds's*[6] among others! The latter in yesterday's issue calls for the DISMEMBERMENT OF FRANCE. That swine *ne ménage pas les transitions*[7] The fellow has always hurled abuse at the GERMANS and fawned upon the French and now he has suddenly changed into a sort of Blind.

As to the latter chap, he hopes to achieve his election as deputy to the next Reichstag by means of a patriotic hubbub and by noisily 'suspending' his republicanism on the altar of the Fatherland.

Oswald kept on at me until I finally went to the third MEETING fixed for yesterday.[8] I took care to arrive a quarter of an hour *early* (the meeting was due to start at 11). I explained to him that I could *not* sign, 1. *d'abord*[9] because I had already signed the Address of the *INTERNATIONAL,*[10] *2.* because I could not sign a private Address (i.e. *a non-International one) without you* and they would miss the OPPORTUNITY due to the time required just for consultation with you. In the future, if an occasion presented itself, we would invite him and his friends to the *International* to take joint action.

I then mentioned that there was a second, *personal* factor. If Louis Blanc was there, his FOOTMAN, Karl Blind, would surely be present too.

He interrupted me: 'At the last MEETING here Blind mounted a furious chauvinistic diatribe. We need you against him.'

'/ cannot remain in the same room as that character, and I must tell you that if he comes I shall leave your house at once.'

I was downstairs in Oswald's study which looks out onto the street. Right enough! My EYEGLASS spied from afar the portentous ex-student, even though he had dyed his head black ALL OVER. He was accompanied by two fellow layabouts. Oswald said he would send them up to the DRAWING ROOM (the conference room) for the moment.

He then proposed to me that he would go up and say I was there and that I could not meet Blind. IN OTHER WORDS, he was g o i n g tO TURN HIM OUT. I said that would not do. *He* had invited Blind, there would be pointless scandal and so on.

I took my hat and parted from Oswald on the most cordial terms. Even if he didn't invent gun-powder, he is still a perfectly decent lad.

At my prompting Serraillier wrote a blunt letter to Dupont about Mothet, so blunt that Dupont was insulted and stopped his correspondence with Serraillier for a fortnight.

I would be glad if you could send me the money for the SEASIDE.[11] I would like to go to Brighton before the week is out. In the circumstances I cannot go any further away from London.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

So you will now send your letters direct to: *Frederick Greenwood,* Esq., EDITOR OF *The Pall Mall Gazette,* 2 Northumberland Street, Strand, London.