---
id: MECW44-201
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, February 28, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "28 February 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in *Annali,* an. 1, Milan, 1958 Reproduced from the original in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO LAURA LAFARGUE

IN MADRID

[London,] 28 February 1872

My dear child,

You may judge of the overwork—I am being bothered with ever since December last—from my negligence in replying to your own and Paul's letters. Still my heart was always with you. In fact, the health of poor little Schnappy[1] occupies my thoughts more than everything, else, and I feel even a little angry at Paul's last epistle, full of interesting details as to the 'movement', but a mere blank in regard to that dear little sufferer.[2]

In consequence of uninterrupted reading and writing, an inflammation of my right eye has set in since a few days, so that it forsakes service for the moment and obliges me to limit even this letter to the most necessary matter-of-fact communications.

In the first instance, Keller is *not* the translator of my book.[3]

When, at last, I had found out his whereabouts, I wrote at once.[4]

In his reply, he told me that he had till then only translated about 200 pages, and that, moreover, he could not proceed with the work before the month of May, being bound by contract to finish the translation of a medical work. This would not do for me. I have found in Roy, the translator of Feuerbach, a man perfectly suitable to my purpose. Since the end of December, he has received from me the corrected manuscript of the Second German edition[5] up to *pagina* 280. To-day I have written him to send at once to Paris what manuscript may be ready.[6]

As to the biography, I have not yet made up my mind as to whether it be at all opportune to publish it in connection with this work.[7]

As to the preface for Proudhon,[8] *j'y penserait*[9]

The printings Paul wants I shall send to-morrow[10] and should have done so before, if I had found the time to look after some statistical facts in 'the 18. Brumaire' which, I apprehend, are not quite correct.

To Liebknecht I shall write.[11]

As to Lara, making him—a man who is a perfect stranger to our party—a contributor to our party prints, is quite out of the question.[12] At the same time, you ought not to neglect all relations with his family. Under certain circumstances they might prove useful.

I regret that you have written to Woodhull et C°. They are humbugs that compromise us. Let Paul write to Charles A. Dana, editor of *The Sun* (New York) and offer him Spanish correspondence, and ask him at the same time (such things must be settled beforehand with the Yankees) as to the money terms. I enclose a few lines to Dana.[13] If he should not accept, I shall find another paper at New York. *(The Herald* or something else).

The *New Social Demokrat* is the continuation of Schweitzer's paper[14] under another editorship. He observed still a certain decorum. It is now a mere police paper, Bismarck's paper for the Lassalleans, as he has his feudal, his liberal, his all sort of colour papers.

*Apropos.* Misled by one of your letters I had put in the contract with Lachâtre'[15]*somme de*... *sera remise à Paris*... *quinze jours après demande*}[16] I shall write him to-morrow, that I prefer the payment on 1st July. In case of need, I can find the money, but I must be informed beforehand.

And now, my dear child, *adio,* with thousand kisses for little Schnappy and yourself, and my greetings to Paul.

Yours most devotedly

Old Nick[17]

The 'Circular' against the dissentients'[18] you will receive as soon as printed.