---
id: MECW44-160
title: "Letter to Theodor Cuno, November 13, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 November 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published in *Die Gesellschaft,* No. 11, Berlin, 1925 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO THEODOR CUNO[1]

IN MILAN

London, 13 November 1871
122 Regent's Park Road, N.W.

Esteemed Friend,

In reply to your kind letter of the 1st inst., I regret to have to tell you that we have no contacts in Milan at the moment, apart from the *Gazzettino Rosa,* to which we send documents for publication,[2] but which has otherwise made no offers so far on the establishment of sections, etc. The movement in Italy in International terms broke out so suddenly and unexpectedly that everything is still very disorganised and, as you know, the Mordecaians[3] are doing their best to hamper the organisation. That there must be useful elements in Milan is obvious enough, if only from the fact that the *Gazzettino Rosa* has a reading public. In the meantime, the only thing you can do is to try and discover them. I promise to send you the address of the first one to get into contact with me from there. This will undoubtedly happen shortly, since my name will soon enough become known everywhere as secretary for Italy through the flood of forthcoming publications from the General Council. As the stronghold of Mazzini's followers hitherto, and as major industrial city, Milan is of great importance for us, particularly since, if it falls to us, the areas in Lombardy where the silk industry is concentrated will automatically be ours, too. So anything you and your friends can achieve in Milan for the common cause will have a *very special* value.

We have a strong section in Turin (address: *Proletario Italiano);* letters from Lodi (the *Plebe),* which presumably reported on the establishment of sections, have gone astray.

I met Ricciotti Garibaldi at Marx's house this morning. He is a highly intelligent young man with a very calm manner, but a soldier rather than a thinker. However, he may turn out to be very useful. It is just as with the old man;[4] his theoretical ideas give more proof of his good intentions than of his clarity of vision, but his last letter to Petroni is invaluable to us.[5] If the sons prove to have the same sure instincts in every great crisis as the old man, they will achieve much. Can you obtain a reliable address for us in Genoa? We want to be able to send our things safely to Caprera for the old man, and Ricciotti says that a lot gets intercepted.

Since the Mordecaians will now know my name as well, could I ask you to address letters for me to:

Miss Burns, 122 R.P.R., London, N.W. (as per letter-head), and not to High Holborn where I only go once a week and a lot of post just lies around waiting.

An inner envelope is *not* necessary. I am sending you an English paper chosen at random through the post and enclosing:

1. *Résolutions de la Conférence de l'Internationale à Londres, Sept 1871.*

2. *The Civil War in France.* Address of the General Council.

3. The new edition of the Rules,[6] available up to now only in English; French and German versions will appear shortly.

Write to me again soon. *Salut et fraternité.*

F. Engels