---
id: MECW44-155
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Jozewicz, November 6, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 November 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published in *Die Gesellschaft,* No. 3, Berlin, 1933 Printed according to a handwritten copy Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FERDINAND JOZEWICZ[1]

IN BERLIN

[London,] 6 November 1871

Dear Friend,

I enclose a copy of the French translation of the Conference resolutions.[2] They have also appeared in English, and the German translation will be sent off to the *Volksstaat* tomorrow.

The single English edition of the Rules and Regulations of the International[3] will come out tomorrow. We shall probably publish a German edition in Leipzig and a French one in Geneva. According to the latest Conference resolutions every member must possess a copy of the Rules. I shall send you the stamps as soon as they are available.

With regard to Berlin, my view is that public meetings 'in general' should not be held until more propaganda has been made on the spot. In the meantime, however, every situation with broader implications and of public interest should be exploited both for meetings and for printed manifestoes.[4]

The next opportune occasion will be the scandalous trial of the members of the ex-committee of the Social-Democratic Party in Brunswick, where the International figures as the central feature of the indictment.[5] However, it will be as well to bide one's time until the public sessions, which will focus the attention of Germany on Brunswick.

In the same way, the proposed laws concerning the International which the government intends to lay before the German Reichstag will provide a favourable opportunity. It is to be hoped that the German workers will come out as energetically as the Spanish workers did against similar government interventions.

I made *one* mistake in my last letter.[6] Bebel had sent me *one* detailed report in 1870, at the time when we had settled on Mainz as the venue for the Congress (shortly before the outbreak of the war).

It is not just my duty as corresponding secretary for Germany, it is also a great pleasure for me to be in constant communication with our other friends in Berlin through yourself and Kwasniewski.

*Salut et fraternité.*

Karl Marx