---
id: MECW44-154
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, November 6, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 November 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the original"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 6 November 1871

Dear Friend,

Today 100 copies (50 in French and 50 in English) of the Conference resolutions[1] are being sent off to New York. The decisions not intended for publication will be communicated to you later.

A new, *revised* edition of the Rules and Regulations[2] is due to appear in English tomorrow, and you will receive 1,000 copies for sale in America (Id. each). The text must not be translated into French and German in New York, as we are issuing *official* editions in both languages.[3] Write us how many copies in each language will be wanted.

I have turned over the correspondence with the German Section and the New York Committee[4] to *Eccarius* (he has been appointed to handle that at my suggestion), since my time does not allow me to perform this function properly.

Section 12 (New York) has submitted proposals to the General Council that it be constituted the leader in America. Eccarius will have sent the decisions against these pretensions and for the present Committee[5] to Section 12.[6]

As for the Washington BRANCH (which has sent the General Council a list of its members), the New York Committee went too far.[7] It had no right to demand anything but the number of members and the name, etc., of the corresponding secretary.

More in the next letter (this week).[8]

Yours,

K. M.