---
id: MECW44-085
title: "Letter from Karl Marx to Wilhelm Liebknecht, May 4, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels
written: "4 May 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

[London,] 4 MAY 1871

Dear LIBRARY,[1]

Just this in great haste. The *Papiers et correspondance de la famille impériale,* in which *Vogt* figures among others as someone who was subsidised from the official coffers,[2] were *not* published by the *Commune,* which has no time for such trivia, but by the *gouvernement de la défense,* i.e. by Jules Favre et Co., the honest republicans so greatly admired by Vogt in his letters to Kolb.[3]

Extracts from these official publications (and particularly the *names of those who received subsidies)* were printed in almost all the Paris papers. The cutting I enclose comes from the *Petit Journal* (issue of *3 May 1871*)[4], a paper which to this very day is conducting in Paris the same sort of campaign against the Commune as Signor Vogt in Vienna. From a sense of spiritual affinity with Vogt it even prints a (?) after his name.

Meanwhile, Vogt himself retracts all his talk when he says at the end of his gibberish:

'It is *even* possible that my name was misused as far back as 1859, albeit, so it seems, without my first name Karl.'[5]

So Louis Bonaparte misused 'Vogt' by inscribing his name in his expenses-book! **Vogt** as someone subsidised by Louis Bonaparte *in August 1859*—and moreover, just plain 'Vogt', Vogt without 'first name', Vogt *sans phrase*—naturally, that could only be the 'celebrated' Karl Vogt of Geneva! Mr Vogt is so well aware of that that he says **my name* was *misused'.* The good man feels so stung that he forgets to have recourse to the simple evasion: Just as there are many 'Karls' in the world, so too are there many 'Vogts'. What does it matter to me if some 'Vogt' or other without a first name received 40,000 frs in August 1859 from the Emperor's central treasury? No, says Vogt, I am *the* Vogt, the Vogt to whom people refer even without 'first name', but ****my name** has been ' *****misused**!

You must use all this to make the necessary statement in your paper. It is quite absurd to mince words for the sake of Mr Weiß and similar 'People's Partyites'.[6]

Your

K. M.