---
id: MECW44-053
title: "Letter to Peter Imandt, November 11, 1870"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "11 November 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 33, Moscow, 1964 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO PETER IMANDT

IN DUNDEE

[London,] 11 November 1870

Dear Imandt,

Your nephew[1] arrived yesterday morning. Your letter came today. However, we have resolved in a full family council that Imandt junior should stay here until Wednesday 3[2] and then leave on the steamer.

Firstly, as far as his departure itself is concerned, we do not wish to lose the pleasure of his company so soon, and it will do him good to take a breather.

Secondly, *quoad*[3] the method of travel, he arrived here from Southampton quite frozen, and the train journey to Dundee would be far too exhausting for him (and it would be even worse in the 3rd class), whereas travelling FIRST CLASS by boat for 20sh., he would receive his due measure of warmth.

He is a very sound and well-educated young man who has given us all immense pleasure.

I hope that you are satisfied with this arrangement. *Salut*

Your

K. M.

*Apropos,* our Wilhelm, not *rex,* but Wilhelm Liebknecht is a real thorn in the side of the Prussians with his *Volksstaat* even though he imagines, in his narrow-minded way, that he always has to say black when the enemy says white and vice versa. In consequence he takes all the phrases of someone like Gambetta and his consorts at their face value and so constantly deceives his readers on matters of fact in just the same way as the French are entertained with FALSE NEWS by their GOVERNORS.

Mr Freiligrath, meanwhile, has become the producer of feelings for the NATIONAL LIBERAL PHILISTINE. And rightly so. He has to give something in return for the proceeds of the collections WHICH HE HAS POCKETED.