---
id: MECW44-037
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 6, 1870"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 September 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collecte"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 September 1870

DEAR FRED,

I had just 'sat down' to write to you when Serraillier came to tell me that he is leaving London tomorrow for Paris, but only for a few days. His chief purpose is to arrange matters with the *International* there *(Conseil Fédéral de Paris).* This is all the more essential as the entire FRENCH BRANCH[1] is setting off for Paris today to commit all sorts of follies there in the name of the *International*. 'They' intend to bring down the Provisional Government, establish a *commune de Paris,* nominate Pyat as French ambassador in London, and so forth.

I received today a proclamation to the German people from the *Conseil Fédéral* in Paris[2] (I shall send it on to you tomorrow), together with an urgent appeal to the *Conseil General* to issue a new manifesto specifically for the Germans. I had already planned to propose that this evening. Please could you send me as soon as possible the relevant military notes on Alsace-Lorraine in English for use in the manifesto.

I have already sent a *detailed* answer today to the *Conseil Fédéral,* and have also subjected myself to the unpleasant task of opening their eyes to the true state of affairs.[3]

Received a reply from Brunswick to the effect that they will agitate precisely in accordance with my instructions.[4]

*Apropos!* Longuet telegraphed me the proclamation of the Republic on Sunday. I received the telegram at 4 a.m.

Jules Favre, although a notorious scoundrel and man of June[5] is good *pour le moment*[6] as Foreign Minister. He had always opposed the old Thiers policies and come out in favour of the unity of Italy and of Germany.

I am only sorry for Rochefort for being a member of this *gouvernement* which also includes the infamous Garnier-Pages. But he could not well refuse to take part as a MEMBER of the *comité de défense.*

Best thanks for the cash. Even the gods have no knowledge of any claim I might have to half your fee.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Paul, Laura and Schnappy[7] arrived safely in Bordeaux on 2 September. All the better as Lafargue would never have left [Paris] UNDER the PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES.[8]

Here there are veritable floods of *réfugiés qui ont sauvé la caisse.*[9]

As I wrote to you before, GENTLEMEN-S residences are going up in price.[10]

Do you not think that if the weather, which is said to be abominable in France at the moment, continues like this, as is very probable after the unusually long drought that has preceded it, the Prussians will have good 'cause' to listen to reason, especially as the Anglo-Russo-Austrian alliance is threatening?

Dupont, who used to correspond with Pigott, ought to write the swine an abusive letter in the name of the French republicans. Urge him to do so.