---
id: MECW44-255
title: "Letter to E. Glaser de Willebrord, August 19, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "19 August 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (French), in: M. Nettlau, *Michael Bakunin. Eine Biographie,* Bd. III, London, 1898 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Wo"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO E. GLASER DE WILLEBRORD[1]

IN BRUSSELS

[Excerpt from a letter]

[London,] 19 August 1872

As you will already know, victory is now ours. The Italians, self-styled Internationalists, have held a Conference at Rimini[2] at which the representatives of 21 sections resolved that: The Conference, etc., etc.

It would be advisable to publish this immediately, in the *Internationale* and the *Liberté.* Bakunin, whose style is detectable throughout the document, realising that the game was up, has beaten a retreat all along the line and, with his followers, is leaving the International. *Bon voyage* to Neuchâtel.

But what is even more absurd is that, of the 21 sections which claim the right to convene an International Congress, only one, that of Naples, actually belongs to the International. The remaining 20, in order to safeguard their autonomy, have repeatedly abstained from taking any of the steps prescribed by our General Regulations as conditions of admission. Their principle is '*L'Italia farà da* sè';[3] they constitute an International outside the International. The three other sections which maintain relations with the General Council—Milan, Turin and Ferrara— did not send delegates to Rimini.

Thus, in addition to the *Conseil fédéraliste universel*'**[4] ***** constituted by societies which do not belong to the International and, for that very reason, claim to control it, we now have an anti-authoritarian Congress convened by societies outside the International and claiming to make laws for it.**

For the rest, this has happened just at the right moment to open the Spaniards' eyes; in that country we have succeeded in enticing the fox from his lair. We have forced the Alliancists themselves to publish the Rules of the 'eminently secret' Alliance.^10 The present (Spanish) Federal Council, with 5 Alliancists out of 8 members, has been unmasked and publicly denounced as perfidious to the International. Everywhere the struggle has broken out between

Alliancists and Internationalists. The oldest TRADE UNION in the world, that of machine-spinners and weavers in Catalonia, 40,000 strong,[5] has come out in support of us and sent Mora, who is one of us, to the Congress[6] because, according to his mandate, he knows better than anyone else what the Alliance is like." The Rimini resolution will put paid to the Alliance in Spain.

The Danes are sending two delegates; the Germans 5 or 6 at least. Sorge and Dereure are on their way from America; the schismatics there want to send three.

Lafargue is coming with a mandate from the Portuguese. Another advantage is that the Congress will henceforth be free of public rumpuses. Everything will go off decorously in front of the bourgeois public.

As for the Neuchâtel Congress, it will turn out to be nothing more than a meeting of the Jura Federation, in company with a few Italian sections, and hence an utter fiasco.

At last all is going well, but we must not allow this to lull us to sleep. If the Internationalists do their duty, the Hague Congress will be a great success; it will establish the organisation on a sound basis and will once again enable the Association to develop internally in a peaceful manner while confronting its external enemies with renewed vigour.