---
id: MECW44-219
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, April 23, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "23 April 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 23 April 1872

Dear Liebknecht,

We all send you our congratulations on your performance in court.[1] After the trial of the Brunswickers[2] it was essential for someone to stand up to that gang and you have fairly done so. The only thing you might have left unsaid was the statement about the 1,000 members of the International.[3]

Here in England jurymen are locked up overnight or kept *prisoner* under guard in an hotel, to make sure that they do not come into contact with anyone. They are taken for walks under escort and are also escorted to church on Sundays, if they wish to go. An exception is only made in cases like the Tichborne trial,[4] where this was not possible because of the inordinate duration of the proceedings (105 days), but even then the jurymen are harassed in all sorts of ways.

Marx will reply to the *Concordia*[5] as soon as he has compared *The Times* of 1864.[6]

Your letter appeared in *The Eastern Post*;[7] whether it also appeared in *The Morning Post* is not to be discovered, since the paper is unobtainable here. The fact is that reading rooms where such things would be preserved, *have simply ceased to exist.* We send *The Eastern Post* regularly to the ends of the earth so that the letter will be publicised far more widely—and among the *right people*—than through other papers.

We can scarcely doubt that the sentence *must* be quashed. Such breaches of the law have been unheard of since the Demagogue trials.[8] Nor can it be to the advantage of the national-liberal bourgeoisie to establish such precedents, and I doubt very much whether Bismarck, who is hiding behind the small states with the intention of discrediting them, would be willing to risk that sort of thing in Prussia.

I have seen very little about the trial in the English press—I have so many foreign papers to read that I can only read *The Daily News* and you must realise that since the introduction of the PENNY PRESS[9] it is not possible to find papers *anywhere* to read without buying them. The article from *The Daily News*[10] is enclosed; you can make good use of it.

I have passed the bill for the Rules[11] on to Marx; we shall send the money at the first opportunity.

I have not been able to get hold of a photograph of Blanqui up to now. The French have one but will not part with it, and there is none to be found here.

Enclosed the receipt for the 6 reichsthalers for the refugees. It is just not possible for us to conjure up an introduction to the *Manifesto* out of a hat for you.[12] We shall have to study the socialist literature of the last 24 years, if we are to bring Section III up to date. This must be postponed for a subsequent edition, but we intend to send you a small preface[13] for the separate edition, and that will suffice for the moment.

What Scheu[14] has to say about the Belgians is partly correct; the fellows have never been worth much and are now worth less than ever. We have sent someone over there who will let us have a detailed report shortly. At all events Scheu's deductions are wide of the mark—the mass of the people will never go so far with Messrs Hins (who through his Russian wife has a certain connection with Bakunin) and Steens (whose vanity is great enough to seduce him into foolish adventures). Particularly since we are making very good progress elsewhere in the world. Our people have defeated the Bakuninists at the Spanish Congress in Saragossa.[15]

As for Cuno, he has behaved extremely well in Milan and what he tells me in his letters about his fate is completely true and has been confirmed by the Italian press.[16] But it seems quite undeniable to me that, on his journeyings, having been shown the door for the sake of the International through no fault of his own and having landed in Bavaria, helpless and penniless, he has since been treated *very uncouthly* indeed by the people he has encountered in various places. He may have had rather dewy-eyed ideas about the help he might look forward to, but your money would be better spent if it were reserved for people *such as him,* instead of its being squandered on tramps and rogues *like Rüdt, etc.,* about whom you yourselves write letters like those read out at the trial (and which have unfortunately not appeared in the *Volksstaat*—as though that might help!). But, of course, Cuno was not one of the full-fledged men of the 'Party' and so had no business getting into trouble! If I had money I would really sooner send it to him than to anyone else.

The General Council's circular against the Bakuninists[17] is now likely to appear next week; it is a French edition. The first instalment of Marx's second edition[18] will also come out soon, but do not mention it until Marx writes to you about it or until it is out.[19] The Russian translation[20] —a very good one—is out, the French version[21] is in the press.

Enclosed are:

1. Receipt for the 6 thalers.
2. 3 cuttings from *The Eastern Post*—meetings of the General Council,[22] etc.
3. 1 *ditto* on the celebrations of 18 March.[23] 4. 2 Irish documents.[24] 5. Our reply to the debate in Parliament.[25] 6. Article from *The Daily News* on your trial.[26]

So *nine items* in all.

Must catch the post. Best regards to Bebel and keep your chin up; they haven't got you in jug yet. But make sure that the sale of the stamps goes through properly and not just in Leipzig; we shall *be very strict* at the next Congress.

Best wishes to your family.

Your

F. E.