---
id: MECW44-238
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, June 21, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 June 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Published in English in full for "
status: raw
---

MARX TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE[1]

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 21 June 1872

Dear Friend,

I received what you sent on 7 June yesterday (together with the enclosed report).[2]

You will in the meantime have received my second letter,[3] ditto Le Moussu's letter, which definitively formulates the COUNCIL'S position for the UNITED STATES.

The next Congress will be held on the first Monday in September 1872 in The Hague (Holland)[4] —the official notifica- tion will be sent to New York next week. It simply will not do for you to fob us off with a memorandum. *At this Congress the life or death of the International will be at stake. You yourself and at least one other, if not two,* must attend. As for the sections which do *not* send *delegates* directly, they can send *mandates* (mandates for dele- gates).

*The Germans* for me, F. Engels, Lochner, Karl Pfänder, Lessner. *The French* for *G. Ranvier, Auguste Serraillier, Le Moussu, Ed. Vaillant, F. Cournet, Ant Arnaud The Irish* for *MacDonnel,* who is doing very well, or if they prefer, for one of the above-named Germans or French.

Naturally, only 1 delegate for each section, however numerous, unless it has over 500.

You will already know of the beautiful Belgian project to revise the Rules.[5] It stems from Hins, an *ambitieux impuissant,*[6] who, to- gether with his Russian wife, takes orders from Bakounine. One of its finest features is *the abolition of the GENERAL COUNCIL.*[7] The whole plan has been deservedly hauled over the coals in *La Emancipacion* (Madrid), the organ of the Spanish Federal Coun- cil.[8] The same paper gave enthusiastic approval to our American resolutions.[9]

From the enclosed copy of the *Egalité* you will see that the *Congrès Romand* has also rapped Hins over the knuckles.[10]

I am sending you by post 4 COPIES of the *Circulaire* of the GENERAL COUNCIL on *Les prétendues scissions dans l'Internationale.*[11] Engels has despatched 200 to you per PARCEL COMPANY.

As for my *Capital,* the first German instalment will be published next week,[12] ditto the first French instalment in Paris.[13] You will be getting copies of both regularly from me for you and some of your friends. Of the French edition (the title-page of which reads, by no means as a mere phrase, '*entièrement révisée par l'auteur',*[14] for I have had the devil of a job with it), 10,000 COPIES have been printed and 8,000 sold already before publication of the first instalment.

In Russia, books after printing is completed but before they are released to the public, must be submitted to the censorship authority, which must file suit in court if it does not want to pass them.

They write me as follows from Russia regarding the Russian translation (a masterly one) of my book:[15]

'In the censorship office two censors went over the work and laid their conclusions before the censorship committee. Even before the examination it was decided in principle not to hold this book up merely because of the author's name, but to make a close investigation of how far it really corresponds to its title. The following is a summary of the conclusion that was unanimously adopted by the censorship committee and submitted to the Main Administration for decision:

' "Although the author, according to his convictions, is a thorough-going socialist and the whole book has a quite definite socialist character, nevertheless, in view o r the fact that the presentation can by no means be called accessible to everyone and that, on the other hand, it possesses the form of a rigidly mathematical scientific demonstration, the Committee declares the prosecution of this book in court to be impossible."'[16]

Accordingly it was allowed out into the world. Three thousand copies have been printed. It was made available to the Russian public on 27 March, and 1,000 copies had been sold by 15 May already.

In his announcement of my book the primeval KNOW-NOTHING lout Heinzen found cause for amusement at the statement on the title-page: 'Translation rights reserved'. Who would want to translate such nonsense! The book was obviously written merely in order that Karl Heinzen shouldn't understand it.

We have issued a French translation of the ADDRESS *ON THE CIVIL WAR,* price 2 Väd. per copy.[17] If wanted in the UNITED STATES, please write.

Regarding the Nicholson affair, it is best not to say anything about it in the GENERAL COUNCIL for the present.[18]

*Salut*

Yours,

K. M.