---
id: MECW44-083
title: "Letter to Leó Frankel, around April 26, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 April 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVI, Moscow 1935 First published in English in full in: Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, *On the Paris Commune,* Progress Publis"
status: raw
---

MARX TO LÉO FRANKEL

IN PARIS [Draft]

[London, around 26 April 1871] Dear Citizen![1]

I have been authorised by the General Council to issue a most emphatic denial on its behalf of the foul slander being spread by Citizen F. Pyat against Serraillier.[2] Pyat's fury springs from one single source: *his hatred for the International.* Through the *so-called* French Section in London,[3] which has been expelled by the General Council, and which has been infiltrated by police spies, one-time imperial guardsmen and touts, Pyat has been trying to pose before the world as the secret leader of our Association, to which he does not belong, and to make us responsible for his absurd manifestations in London and his compromising indiscre- tions in Paris, which, by the way, Citizen Tridon has already flayed during his stay in Brussels.[4] That is why the General Council was forced to disown this dirty schemer publicly.[5] Hence his furies against Dupont and Serraillier. When Serraillier threatened to summon the vile toadies of Pyat in the so-called French Section before an English court to answer for the slander Pyat keeps spreading in Paris, *the French Section itself* disowned them and branded them as slanderers.

One of these days, the General Council is to issue an Address on the Commune.[6] It has put off this manifesto up to now, because it was expecting the Paris Section from day to day to supply it with precise information. In vain! Not a word! The Council could not afford to wait any longer because the English workers have been eagerly awaiting its explanation.

Meanwhile, time has not been wasted. The true character of this grand Paris revolution has been explained to workers everywhere in letters from various secretaries to sections on the Continent and in the United States.

Since Serraillier's political life has given no occasion for slander,[7]

it was his private life that was attacked. Had Pyat's private life been as clean as Serraillier's, he would not have had to submit

here, in London, to affronts which it takes blood to wash away...[8]

I have had a letter and a visit from a certain citizen over the despatch of you know what. The mistake they made in Paris was not to hand over the papers required to facilitate the operations. You should now have some three per cent securities which circulate freely and which can be sold at the current rate. The citizen will give you any other necessary explanations.

He can be quite safely entrusted with the document.