---
id: MECW44-229
title: "Letter to Nikolai Danielson, May 28, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "28 May 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44, p. 385; First published: in Russian, in Minuvshiye gody, St Petersburg, 1908."
status: raw
---

*To Nikolai Danielson in St Petersburg*

My dear Sir,

My reply to you has been so delayed because I had kept on hoping that I would be able to send you, simultaneously with the letter, the first instalments of the *2nd German edition of 'Capital'* as well as the *French translation* (Paris). But the German and French booksellers have dragged the business out for so long that I cannot postpone it any longer.

First of all, my best thanks for the beautifully bound copy. The translation is *masterly*. I would be grateful if you could let me have a second, unbound, copy — for the British Museum.

I regret that *absolute* [lack of time] (**in the most strictest sense of the word**) prevented me from making a start on the revision for the second edition before the end of December 1871. It would have been of great benefit for the Russian edition.

Although the French edition — (the translation is by Mr Roy, the translator of Feuerbach) — has been prepared by a great expert in both languages, he has often translated too literally. I have therefore found myself compelled to re-write whole **passages** in French, to make them palatable to the French public. It will be all the easier later on to translate the book from French into English and the Romance languages.

I am so *overworked, and in fact so much interfered with in my theoretical studies, that, after September, I shall *withdraw* from the *commercial concern*, which, at this moment, weighs principally upon my own shoulders, and which, as you know, has its ramifications all over the world.* *Mais, est modus in rebus* *and I can no longer afford — for some time at least — to combine two sorts of business of so very different a character.

The news you have communicated to me on our *mutual friend* has delighted both myself and my family. There are few people in the world of whom I am so fond and whom I esteem so much. *

You will much oblige me by delivering the enclosed letter to Dr W. Baranoff at this address: 'Frau Baggohufudt-Gross, Theater Platz, Haus Baron Küster'.

In the hope of hearing from you soon.

Yours very sincerely,
A. W.

One of the barkers at present living in Switzerland — Mr Bakounine — is playing such strange tricks that I would be very grateful for any precise piece of information about the man — 1) as to the extent of his influence in Russia, 2) about his role in the trial of such notorious memory.