---
id: MECW44-286
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, February 12, 1873"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 February 1873"
year: 1873
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT[1]

IN HUBERTUSBURG

London, 12 February 1873

Dear Liebknecht,

Before I can give you a definite answer to the many questions in your letter, I must first know exactly what you mean by saying that 'the *Volksstaat* cannot become involved in International polemics at the present time'.[2] If the *Volksstaat* proclaims itself *neutral* in the International's war against the secessionists, if it refuses to explain these events clearly to the German workers, if, in a word, the Lassallean revolt is to be concluded by your shaking hands over and beyond the International and by your sacrificing the International and Yorck to the Hasselmanns, then our attitude to the *Volksstaat* will *change fundamentally.* So I must ask you to speak out frankly at once.

About my book,[3] negotiations are pending with Wigand and I would have to free myself from him before deciding on any alternative. But on the general issue of letting you have the rights to practically all our earlier writings gratis at the very moment when we are in a position to make money from them, I would ask you to bear in mind that we too need money, firstly in order to live, and secondly in order to meet the daily mounting costs of agitation, propaganda material, etc. The essays by Marx and myself will certainly be collected and printed, but at the moment we have no time to take care of it ourselves. I am even less in a position to distil the essence of Owen's works for you. In the first place I do not have the time and in the second, I lack the material—my collection of Owen's writings went astray in 1848-49, and these things are no longer obtainable.—At all events the *Misère de la philosophie* is being reprinted in Paris; as to the German translation, Marx is negotiating with Meissner about a complete edition of earlier writings and so can hardly just take out one of the largest works without further ado. And anyway, you have plenty of time before you get from the *Utopia* to us; better look after the intermediate links first.

Furthermore, I cannot conceal from you the fact that our treatment at the hands of the 'Party' does absolutely nothing to encourage us to entrust even more of our writings to it. I have not been sent even a single copy of my *Peasant War;* I had to *purchase* the copies I needed for myself. I am not even consulted about the publication of the articles on the housing shortage,[4] whether they should come out separately or together.[5] When I asked for free copies of the *Manifesto*[6] for us and for the Workers' Society here—in recognition of their having reprinted it three times at their own expense—we were sent 100 copies *together with the bill.* I have written to Hepner about that[7] and now request once and for all that this boorish treatment should cease.

I shall try and unearth a copy of the *Utopia* (in English), but it may be difficult as all the old popular editions were bought up long since.

I must close here and regret that I am prevented by the need to catch the post from enclosing a few lines to your wife.[8] Please be kind enough to make my excuses. Does your family still live at 11 Braustrasse? We have only that address and the *Volksstaat.*

With best wishes from your

F. E.