---
id: MECW44-127
title: "Letter to Hermann Meyer, around August 25, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "25 August 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published in *The World,* No. 3687, 21 September 1871 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO HERMANN MEYER

IN WASHINGTON

[Brighton, around 25 August 1871]

We are greatly in want of money... The *affaire* of the Commune increased our duties and obligations, while the war preceding it cut off our Continental supplies. We are now almost overwhelmed with letters from different parts of this country (England), from people wanting information about the International, and sections are being established in the provinces. There are also Irish sections in the course of formation, and we now have an Irish secretary on the Council in the person of MacDonnel,[1] of Fenian notoriety.^6 Besides that, we have had applications from the East Indies and New Zealand.

The Paris Federal Council is to be reorganised. After all Thiers has caught but very few of our men. There is not a prominent member of our association amongst all his prisoners, and there are but two or three missing, who must have been killed in the last days of fighting, as we cannot get either tale or doings of them. Many who were reported over and over again as shot, even detailed accounts given, have turned up again, and are now safely here[2] or in Switzerland.

There is great distress among the refugees here, and between fifty and sixty are without the means of subsistence. Money comes in very slowly. There is to be an appeal issued to your working-men[3] which we trust will be liberally responded to.