---
id: MECW44-174
title: "Letter to Pyotr Lavrov, November 29, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 November 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published, without the postscript, in the language of the original (French) in *Na boyevom postu* (On Guard), Moscow, 1930 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PYOTR LAVROV

IN PARIS

London, 29 November 1871

My dear Sidorov,[1]

I have had your last two letters[2] and if I have been unable to reply sooner, you must lay it at the door of that MOAO^eui» of EaKyHHHi>'s,[3] whose intrigues have been causing us no end of labour. Things are approaching a crisis and open warfare will shortly break out in the press. A clean split is in the offing. In short the matter will be decided before long. I shall not attempt to give you the details—it would take too long and they are too boring. What with all this tomfoolery to contend with, it need hardly be said that neither Johnson[4] nor I have had any time for work.

Thank you for your further disbursements on my behalf in the matter of the *Gazette des Tribuneaux.*

As to Bpo6A.[5] we have been informed by Po3Ba40BCKHH,[6] who left his first position, but found another one a few days later.[7] We have done all we could but, considering the man's obstinate character and ferocious pride, we have had to be very tactful. However we think we have succeeded to the point where at least he will not lack for necessities. You see, he refuses all medical help and it will be even more difficult to overcome this prejudice.

Johnson is suffering from a slight attack of bronchitis and from one or two *furunculi* that are more troublesome than serious. Yesterday he attended the Council for the first time in a month. Apart from that he is tolerably well. The abominable weather we have been having here has given everyone colds.

As to the intrigues over here, they dwindle in importance day by day. The few honest men, who allowed themselves to be carried away, have withdrawn and left the field open for the out and out riff-raff about whom there is no need to bother one's head. It is worse in Switzerland, since MaAOHi>,[8] etc., have fallen into the trap over there, some through spinelessness, others through vanity. So much the worse for them—the world can't stop turning because of their blunders!

Yours ever,

F. E.

*Postscript:*

Herbert Spencer *Psychology*[9]

Do *First Principles*

Bain *Mental and Moral Science*

Do *Logic,* 2 parts

Do *Senses and Intellect*

Do *Emotions and the Will*

Do *Study of Character with an Estimate of Phrenology*

20% discount on the above prices. All the titles under Bain indicate individual works.