---
id: MECW44-345
title: "Letter to Ludwig and Gertrud Kugelmann, May 12, 1873"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: "Jenny Marx Longuet"
written: "12 May 1873"
year: 1873
publication: "First published in german in *Istorichesky arkhiv,* No. 2, Moscow, 1959 First published in English in *Archiv für Sozialgeschichte,* Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung Publishers, Vol. II, [Hanover] 1962 Reprod"
status: raw
---

LONGUET TO LUDWIG AND GERTRUD KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

London, 12 May 1873

My dear friends,

I should be really grieved if I thought you had all this time been looking upon me as a faithless friend—but no—you must surely know me well enough to have attributed my silence to everything but want of friendship. And indeed everything but that has been the cause of it. Ever since Christmas I have been altogether absorbed by the delightful battle known as the struggle for life. Were I to enumerate all the races I have run from the north to the south, from the east to the west of London—and run in vain—to pick up pupils for French, German, singing and elocution, I should sadly tire you. The result of all this has been the acquisition of a vast amount of experience, a thorough insight into the shameless impossible tricks of advertisers, agents, principals of schools etc. Though like Shakespeare's Rosalind I would rather have a fool to make me merry than experience to make me sad[1] —yet in this case I do not regret my hard earned experience—for I hope some day to make known to the public the machinations of these ghouls of middlemen and thus to save others from the snares into which I have fallen. My husband[2] has not been more successful than myself in this land of liberty and free competition. Of course if we had chosen to settle down somewhere in the provinces, to vegetate in some corner out of the world, we might have found employment long ago—but though married, my heart is as it ever was chained to the spot where my Papa is, and elsewhere life would not be life to me. If all fails however I suppose I must leave him... But sufficient for the day is the evil thereof[3] —I will not think of it beforehand.

I have yet to thank you for your last letters, my dear friends. To you, my dear Doctor, I need not write a line in answer to your opinion of the representatives of the Jura at the Congress.?[4] Time has taken the trouble to do that for me, and to do it far more effectually than I could have done. Those miserable intriguers whose sole object is to sow dissension in the Association and to reap the benefit thereof, have been all along treated far too generously by their opponents.—Have you seen the last production of that infamous lump of vanity, Jung, in the *Liberté*[5] The lies he tells of my husband he has concocted together with a *quondam* revolutionist who has now settled down as flunkey in an English gentleman's family, and is content to figure as 'calves'. A companion worthy of the illustrious Jung!

There is no truth whatever in the rumour to which you allude of Papa's going to America.—

The second volume of *Das Kapital* does not progress at all, as the French translation,[6] which has to be almost entirely re-written, takes up the whole of Mohr's time. What do you think of it and of the epilogue to the second edition[7] of *Das Kapital}*

To you, dear Trautchen,[8] I need not say that I think of you very very often and that I long to see you again,—you and dear Fränzchen.[9] Does that young lady still recollect a certain *by-by*[10] of old? Give her my best love. Mohr sends you and Wenzel many greetings in which my husband and mama join. He will write to you soon.

Very faithfully yours,

Jenny