---
id: MECW44-230
title: "Letter to César de Paepe, May 28, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "28 May 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in *L'Actualité de l'histoire,* No. 25, Paris, 1958 Printed according to the original Translated from the French Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO CÉSAR DE PAEPE

IN BRUSSELS

[London,] 28 May 1872

My dear Friend,

Enclosed is a statement by the General Council against Vésinier

[1][2]

and Co.[3] for the Brussels *L'Internationale.* The same thing has been sent to the *Liberté,*

1) because it needs publicity, 2) because Mr Steens *has suppressed* the General Council's reply to the British Parliament which was sent to him.[4]

I have read the report on the Belgian Congress[5] in the *L'Internationale.*[6] How is it that the Flemish are not included among the delegates? Generally speaking, according to the information received here by the French from their compatriots, it would not seem that the International has made much headway in Belgium after the events of the Commune.

For my part I should be ready to accept the Hins draft (with modifications of detail), not because I think it is good, but because it is always better to make certain experiments than to lull oneself with illusions.

It is very characteristic of the Alliance's tactics: in Spain, where it is strongly organised although it has lost the support of the Spanish Federal Council, it attacked at the Barcelona Council all elements of organisation, the Federal Council, etc., as well as the General Council. In Belgium, where 'prejudices' have to be taken into account, it has been proposed that the General Council be abolished with its functions being transferred to the Federal Councils (this was opposed at Barcelona) and even enlarged.

I can hardly wait for the next Congress. It will be the end of my slavery. After that I shall become a free man again; I shall accept no administrative functions any more, either for the General Council or for the British Federal Council.

Yours as ever,

Karl Marx