---
id: MECW44-264
title: "Letter to Maurice Lachâtre, October 12, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "12 October 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Pravda,* 5 May 1970 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO MAURICE LACHÂTRE

IN SAN SEBASTIAN

London, 12 October 1872

Dear Citizen,

You will, I am sure, excuse my long silence, which has been caused by an excessive amount of work. I have at last rid myself of the burdensome administrative business which devolved upon me as a member of the General Council of the International and which, as the days went by, was becoming more and more incompatible with my theoretical studies. At present I still have various tasks entrusted to me by the Hague Congress,[1] but after that I shall be able to dispose of my time more freely.

The first series of *Capital*[2] has been well done on the whole—I refer to those things incumbent upon the editor. However I was much shocked at the *errata* which it contains and which were not in the last proofs corrected by me. As an example I am sending you a bit from instalment II p. 16 which reads:

**Ensuite nous avons vu que dès qu'il s'exprime dans la valeur, tous les caractères qui distinguaient le travail productif de valeurs d'usage disparaissent.**[3]

In instalment II as published (p. 16) they have this totally meaningless sentence:

**Ensuite nous avons vu que dès que le travail productif s'exprime dans la valeur, tous les caractères qui le distinguaient des valeurs d'usage disparaissent.**[4]

There are other errors of this kind and I have sent a list of them to Mr Vernouillet, at the same time informing him that I shall pass nothing for press until I have in front of me the whole series of five instalments to be published.

Mr Vernouillet has been good enough to send me Mr Maurice Block's pamphlet (extracted from the *Journal des Économistes)*.[5]

Here we have a man of brains who doesn't even know what an **average** is, although he purports to have devoted his whole life to statistics! I wouldn't deny that there may have been a certain amount of ill-will on his part, but on the whole there is more stupidity in him than malice.

The changes it was necessary to make in Mr Roy's translation have taken a great deal of time, but it gets better from the third section onwards.

In Russia my book[6] has proved an extraordinary success. As soon as I have a little more time, I shall send you some extracts from the Russian reviews.[7] The Russian translation (in a fat volume) was published at the end of April ('72) and I have already been advised by Petersburg that a second edition will be appearing in 1873.^860

At The Hague I found Laura very unwell and her health deteriorated still further after my departure. A letter received yesterday brings better news and next month I shall have the pleasure of seeing her here with her husband.[8]

Last Friday the wedding took place between Jenny, my eldest daughter, and Longuet (who sends you his regards).[9]

How goes it with public affairs in Spain? In my opinion you and many of the other proscribed Frenchmen[10] (save, perhaps, for those most compromised) will soon be able to return home.

I remain, dear Citizen,

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx