---
id: MECW44-039
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 10, 1870"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 September 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. IV, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in M"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 September 1870

Dear FRED,

You and Dupont must forgive me for answering so late and then only in a few lines. I am OVERWHELMED with political BUSINESS.

You can see from the enclosed pieces of imbecility from opposite places—one from Paris, the other from Brunswick—just how pleasant our task is made for us.

You know that I sent instructions to Brunswick.[1] I assumed—mistakenly—that I was not dealing with uncouth BABIES, but with educated people who must be aware that the brutal language of a letter is not designed 'for printing', and furthermore that instructions have to contain *confidential hints* that are not intended to be *revealed* in the blare of publicity. WELL! These jackasses not only print 'word-for-word' extracts from my letter. They point their pitchforks *at me,* identifying me as the author. And they *print* sentences, such as the one about 'shifting the centre of gravity of the continental labour movement from France to Germany', etc., which were intended to spur them on, but which were not to be published *now* under any circumstances.[2] I suppose I must be grateful to them at least for *not* having published my criticism of the French workers. And to cap it all the fellows even sent their compromising mishmash IN HOT HASTE—*to Parisl* (To say nothing of Brussels and Geneva.)

I shall really tell them a few home truths, but the damage is done! On the other hand, there are the fools in Paris! They have sent me piles of their absurd chauvinistic manifesto[3] which the English workers here greeted with derision and indignation that I had the greatest difficulty in preventing from being expressed publicly. I am supposed to send the thing to Germany *en masse,* probably to prove the Germans that they first have to **withdraw across the Rhine** before they arrive *homel* And furthermore, instead of writing a rational answer to my letter,[4] the fellows take the liberty of sending me instructions by telegraph (instructions from ex-student Longuet!) on *how* I must set about agitating *in Germany I Quel malheur!^a*

I have set everything in motion here for the workers to force their government to recognise the French Republic.[5] (The series of MEETINGS begins on Monday.^b) Gladstone WAS WILLING ENOUGH at first. But the *Queen*^c was under Prussian instructions and there was also the oligarchic part of the CABINET!

I am sorry to see that that lousy, importunate, vain and over-ambitious babbler Cluseret has got his hooks into Grousset of the *Marseillaise,* a very able, staunch and courageous man.

The new *Address*[6] (THANKS for your contribution to it) will be printed by Tuesday. It is long, but that was unavoidable.

Your articles on the FORTIFICATIONS of Paris and the bombardment of Strasbourg are masterly.[7]

Tell Dupont that I am in complete agreement with his views, and that I *expressly* commissioned *Serraillier* to write to him saying that he should *not* leave Manchester *pro nunc^f}*

Schorlemmer here the evening before last.

*Salut*

Your

K. M.

*Apropos!* Prof. Schäffle of Tübingen has published a massive and idiotic book[8] against me (it costs 12/6d!).