---
id: MECW44-120
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, August 18, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "18 August 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN BRIGHTON

[London,] 18 August 1871

Dear Moor,

Enclosed *The Public Opinion* with a fuller version of the article from the *National-Zeitung.*[1] You will see that immediately following the passage incriminated in 'The International', there is a further passage, prudently omitted by the latter, which must be answered. The paper has just lost a court case against Goldschmidt and Jenny Lind and is acquiring a reputation for premeditated libel. I would accordingly insist not only on their inserting a reply, but on AN AMPLE AND COMPLETE APOLOGY, IN THE SAME PLACE OF THE PAPER.

It would also serve the *National-Zeitung* damn well right if we were to turn the tables on them and publish the article simultaneously in the *Volksstaat.* That louse Zabel feels far too much at his cannibalistic ease again under Bismarck.

Rozwadowski had a post as a schoolmaster in Somerset without salary, but free board and lodging, until 15 December.[2] He leaves for there tomorrow. He *must* learn English there. I have procured his release — agent's commission £1.1/-, clothes £3.7/-, debts £1.13/-, travel and incidental expenses £1.10/-, total £7.11/-. In addition I laid out £12.12/- yesterday for Dupont's children,[3] which has cleaned me out. Just after we left this morning to settle the matter, your wife arrived with a letter for me from Tibaldi, holding out other prospects for Rozwadowski from Davydov. But it was now too late and Rozwadowski had to leave for Somerset, at least for the moment. If we find out later that the arrangements can be changed to suit all sides, a Frenchman like Beaufort could take over his post and he could return and obtain the Russian money.

I hope the sea air does you good.

Your

F. E.