---
id: MECW44-058
title: "Letter to Natalie Liebknecht, January 13, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 January 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published in Russian in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I (VI), Moscow, 1932 First published in English in full in: Karl Marx, *On the First International,* Arranged and edited, with an introductio"
status: raw
---

MARX TO NATALIE LIEBKNECHT

IN LEIPZIG

London, 13 January 1871

1 Maitland Park Road,

Haverstock Hill, N.W.

My dear Mrs Liebknecht,

The General Council of the 'International' has started a collection for the families of the German 'patriots' persecuted by the Prussian government—patriots in the true sense of the word. The first £5 I am sending you now are intended for Mrs Bebel and yourself.

The libellous London correspondent of that pedant Bieder­mann[1] undeniably belongs to the police personnel of the local Prussian Embassy, which was active in like fashion at the time of the Communist trial in Cologne in 1852. We shall track the man down and publicise the activities of this clique in the local press and so shed light on the latest phase of Christian-Prussian-Germanic ethics.

In the issue of the *Volksstaat*[2] that arrived today I see that there is a notice in which Mr Nechayev is yet again being treated with undue seriousness. All the things that this Nechayev has had printed in the European press about his deeds and sufferings in Russia are *bare-faced fabrications.* I have the proofs of this to hand. His name, therefore, is one which should never be mentioned.

My wife and daughters[3] send their warmest regards to you, your children and to Liebknecht.

With best wishes for the New Year.

Yours very sincerely,

Karl Marx