---
id: MECW44-275
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, December 14, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "14 December 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 Printed according to the original"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 14 December 1872

Dear Sorge,

I confirm my letter of the 7th inst.[1] and am sending today 1 copy of the *Emancipaciôn* with the article on Bakunin[2] containing information you too will not have had, and *The International Herald* with the Congress resolutions.[3] That jackass Riley has left out the voting figures.

In Lodi, No. 118 of the *Plebe,* which contained your Address, has been confiscated and Bignami, the editor, has been arrested.[4]

It looks as though the Leipzig high treason trial[5] may be about to repeat itself there. We shall, of course, make as much capital as possible from the affair; it will appear at once in the *Volksstaat* and the *Emancipaciôn*[6] as proof of whom the governments regard as the greater threat: the General Council and its adherents or the Alliancists. It is the best thing that could have happened to us in Italy.

You should have some brief reports on the meetings of the General Council printed in the *Oestliche Post* and in the American press, and send the relevant issues to the *Volksstaat, Egalité* and *The International Herald,* as well as one or two copies here, so that we can use them for Spain and Italy as well as for the French sections; the Danes and Dutch would also print them.

The letter of authority for Serraillier becomes more urgent every day.[7] The Jurassians on one side and the Blanquists on the other, are burrowing away all over France and are *making progress* while Serraillier is already starting not to receive replies from various quarters anymore because he can only write as a private individual. If you continue to delay out of consideration for Dereure, who has been more than suspect since the resignation of the Blanquists,[8] or for any other reason, we shall lose the greater part of France and the tables will be turned on us at the next Congress. In haste.

Your

F. E.