---
id: MECW44-259
title: "Letter to Maltman Barry, September 15, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "15 September 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: *Friedrich Engels. 1820-1970. Referate. Diskussionen. Dokumente,* Hanover, 1971 Reproduced from a handwritten copy Published in English "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MALTMAN BARRY[1]

IN LONDON

[London,] 15 September 1872

Dear Barry,

Marx wishes me to send you a few notes on the Hall of Science men,[2] here they are, I hope they will prove sufficient. Marx said he would send you the circular of the General Council[3] relating to these fellows, but for safety's sake I enclose you a copy which please return.

Yours truly,

F. Engels[4]

About April last a knot of men clubbed together, pretending to represent a few societies which nobody knows, and adopted the grandiloquent name of Universal Federalist Council of the I.W.M.A. and of the sections adhering to it.[5] Not one of the societies they pretended to represent belonged to the International. Not one of themselves belonged to it, on the contrary, two of them had been expelled from it. But this was the very reason why they claimed the right to supersede the then existing General Council and to [take the] direction of the International into their own hands. A circular of that General Council held them up to the ridicule of Europe and they were silent for a time. Now these very same men reappear under the name of Universal Federalist Congress. We find here again the same Landeck who entered at the last trial of the International in Paris (June 1870) into a solemn engagement with the Prefect of Police[6] not to occupy himself anymore with politics or with the International,[7] and [was] since expelled from the London society of French refugees.[8] The same Vésinier, author of a whole library of Holywell street[9] literature *ad*[10] Louis Napoleon, expelled from the International by a committee of the Brussels Congress in 1868, and from the London society of refugees in 1872. The same Schneider, denounced in the German Press as a disturber of workmen's meetings (the police used next morning to pay for the windows, glasses and furniture smashed by him and his helpmates) and as a swindler.[11] The same Zielinski, his right hand man, the same Adolphe Smith, etc., we find moreover a few additional pretenders to fame such as the Pole Mileski who during the conference[12] translated all speeches into Polish for the exclusive benefit of himself, he being the only Pole present most of the time, and Oudet whose harebrained tomfooleries during the Commune are still in the recollection of many. Add a few German poor workingmen from the East End and you have the whole composition of this Universal Congress of twenty five rogues and fools.