---
id: MECW44-070
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, March 23, 1871"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 March 1871"
year: 1871
publication: "First published, in the languages of the original (English and French), in *Annali,* an. 1, Milan, 1958 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44"
status: raw
---

MARX TO PAUL LAFARGUE

IN BORDEAUX

London, 23 March 1871

Dear Paul,

I enclose Serraillier's declaration in the *Courrier de l'Europe, 18 March, 1871*—(this French paper is published at London) in regard to the impudent mystification of the *Paris-Journal* of March 14, of which you are probably aware.[1]

The following is published in *The Times of 22nd March* 1871 under the title ' *The International Association':*

'M. Karl Marx asks us to contradict the statement contained in a letter published by us on the 16th of March, from our Paris correspondent, that

"Karl Marx has written a letter to one of his principal *affiliés* in Paris, stating that he is not satisfied with the attitude which the members of that society have taken up in that city, that they violate the Statutes of the Association in dabbling in politics, that they disorganise labour instead of organising it, etc."

'M. Karl Marx says this statement has evidently been taken from the *Paris-Journal* of the 14th of March, where also the publication in full of the pretended letter is promised, and that the *Paris-Journal* of the 19th of March contains a letter dated London, February 28, 1871, purporting to be signed by him, *which letter M. Marx declares is from beginning to end an impudent forgery.'"*[2]

I come now to the second trick of that dirty Parisian reactionary press. When we were informed of the pretended exclusion of the German **Internationals** by the *Paris 'Internationals',* we wrote to the **frères et amis** at Paris, who replied that this story was nothing but an invention of the Paris press scum. Meanwhile, the false news spread like wildfire through the London press which indulged in long leaders upon that pleasant event proving at the same time the decomposition of the *International* and the incorrigible perversion of the Paris workmen.

In to-day's *Times* (23 March, 1871) the following declaration of the *General Council* is published:

**The Anti-German League**[3] *of Paris*

*To the Editor of "The Times"*

'Sir,

'A statement has gone the round of the English press that the Paris members of the International Working Men's Association had in so far joined the so-called Anti-German League as to declare all Germans to be henceforth excluded from our association.

'This statement is the very reverse of fact. Neither the Federal Council of our association in Paris, nor any of the Paris sections represented by that council, have ever passed any such resolution. The so-called Anti-German League, as far as it exists at all, is the exclusive work of the upper and middle classes; it was started by the Jockey Club,[4] and kept up by the adhesions of the Academy, of the Stock Exchange, of some bankers and manufacturers, etc. The working classes have nothing whatever to do with it.

'The object of these calumnies is evident. A short time before the outbreak of the late war the International was made the general scapegoat for all untoward events. This is now repeated over again. While the Swiss and Prussian press accuse it of having created the late outrage upon Germans in Zurich,[5] French papers, such as the *Courrier de Lyon, Le Courrier de la Gironde, La Liberté,* etc., tell of certain secret meetings of Internationals having been held at Geneva and Bern, the Prussian ambassador in the chair, in which meetings a plan was concocted to hand over Lyons to the united Prussians and Internationals for the sake of common plunder.[6]

'*By order of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association*

'J. G. Eccarius,

General Secretary' London, March 22

I have to-day still so many letters to write that I must shut up. Tell Laura that I was greatly delighted with her letter.

Yours,

K. Marx[7]

Your letter to Jenny has just arrived. It is not my youthful ardour, as you believe, but *manifestoes* published by the Federal Council of Paris during the war and communicated to us *officially,* that made the GENERAL COUNCIL believe in the possibility of such a foolish thing as the exclusion of the German Internationals by the Parisian Internationals! I have today sent to the *Volksstaat* in Leipzig (Liebknecht's newspaper) and the *Zukunft* in Berlin (Dr Jacoby's organ) a statement on the fantasies of the *Paris-Journal* and the alleged exclusion of the German Internationals by the Parisians, which has caused a great commotion in the German **bonne presse.** I concluded this statement with the words:

'It is quite natural that the important dignitaries and the ruling classes of the old society who can only maintain their own power and the exploitation of the productive masses by *national* conflicts and antagonisms, recognise their common adversary in the *International Working Men's Association.'*[8]