---
id: MECW44-253
title: "Letter to Nikolai Danielson, August 15, 1872"
volume: 44
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "15 August 1872"
year: 1872
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 44, p. 421; First published: in Russian, in Minuvshiye gody, St Petersburg, 1908."
status: raw
---

*To Nikolai Danielsonb in St Petersburg*

**[London,] 15 August 1872**

Dear Sir,

I hope you have received the first part of the second German edition [of Volume I of Capital] which I have sent you a few days since. I shall also send you the first 6 *livraisons* of the French edition which will be out in a few days. It is necessary to compare *both editions* because I have added and changed here and there in the French edition.

Your interesting letter I have received and shall answer to it in a few days. I have also received the manuscript and the article of the *Vestnik*.

To-day I write in all haste, for one special purpose which is of the *most urgent* character.

Bakunin has worked secretly since years to undermine the International and has now been pushed by us so far as to throw away the mask and *secede openly* with the foolish people led by him — the same man who was the manager in the Nechayev affair. Now this Bakunin was once charged with the Russian translation of my book [of Volume I of Capital], received the money for it in advance, and instead of giving work, sent or had sent to Lubanin (I think) who transacted for the publisher with him the affair, a most infamous and compromising letter. It would be of the highest utility for me, *if this letter was sent me* immediately. As this is a mere *commercial* affair and as in the use to be made of the letter no names will be used, I hope you will procure me that letter. But no time is to be lost. If it is sent, it ought to be sent at once as I shall leave London for the Haag Congress at the end of this month.

Yours very truly,
A. Williams