---
id: MECW50-310
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, June 18, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "18 June 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN LONDON

Eastbourne, 596 18 June 1895
4 Royal Parade

Dear Ede,

Thank you for your letter—there is some improvement but, in accordance with the principles of dialectics, the positive and the negative aspects are both showing a cumulative tendency. I am stronger, eat more and with a better appetite and look very well, or so I am told; thus my general condition has improved. On the other hand, the disease as such has also shown a cumulative tendency—more tumours and hence more pain and greater difficulty in getting to sleep, etc. The thing is taking a course that is normal, if more critical and not quite so sluggish as in London. Consequently my duly acquired pathological stupidity has tended to grow worse, as has my inability to work. Today I have had another particularly bad day but now, at 5 p.m., my mind is just beginning to grow a little more lucid.

Louise, Ludwig and their little girl came down on Saturday.[1] Ludwig has to be back on duty at his London hospital on Sunday but will probably return here on the Friday or Saturday.

The Avelings are coming down on Saturday or Sunday and, perhaps, Sam Moore also. Unfortunately they will have to provide their own entertainment since, subjectively and objectively, I am a bore.

Love to Gine and the children.[2] My visitors have all gone out and I have been trying to get a little sleep.

Yours,

F.E.