---
id: MECW50-265
title: "Letter to Hermann Engels, February 8, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "8 February 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published in *Deutsche Revue,* Jg. 46, Bd. II I, 1921 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

IN BARMEN

London, 8 February 1895

Dear Hermann,

The arrival of your letter of the 23^rd coincided with a spell of fine, frosty weather which has been playing Old Harry with consignments of wine. I have nevertheless ordered your sherry from Dublin but with the proviso that I shall not give instructions for it to be despatched until such time as the Rhine is open again and there is no longer any danger of the wine freezing en route. Indeed, I myself had a mild fright when five cases!—fifteen dozen of port and claret en route to me from Dublin were exposed for about forty-eight hours to an unexpected frost. It would seem, however, that everything has turned out all right, for the stuff I have sampled so far has not suffered, while a period of repose in my splendid wine cellar—an even temperature and space for nearly one hundred dozen in eight brick-walled bins—will see to the rest.

For the first time in many years we are again having a real Continental winter over here. Warm, almost spring-like up till the New Year with the shrubs all coming into bud, then cold and, for the past three weeks, constant sharp frost (80-100 Centigrade—60-80 Réamur of frost at night) and snow. When the north-easter blows it is bitterly cold but when, like yesterday and today, there is little wind, it is glorious. Fortunately there is always enough wind to disperse the fog, the result being a marvellous blue sky.

I can well imagine your tribulations as a result of wining, dining and dancing to the accompaniment of serenades from a cavalry band. Over here we call it THE SOCIAL TREADMILL which, however diverting it may often have been in one's younger days, is a pretty ghastly business when one gets older. I fight tooth and nail to keep out of it, but in this country, too, the likes of us cannot escape it entirely at Christmastime.

The *£40* from Wilhelm Pf. duly and gratefully received.

Incidentally, on this occasion I survived the treadmill of the festive season in better shape than usual because I took proper care of myself and

just now, what with icy weather so similar to that at home, I feel better than I have done for a long time. I have also been able to put the heating properties of my new study to the supreme test, for not only is there the extraordinary cold to contend with, but, added to that, the two neighbouring houses are both empty, i.e. unheated, and my room abuts on the two party walls. And I have nevertheless managed to keep it warm. It was not until yesterday that I felt a bit chilly, but whenever one's need is greatest, help is always close at hand. On this occasion Rudolf's[1] nightshirt stepped into the breech, whereupon I smartly stepped into it.

You can learn about my fellow occupants[2] from Oscar Jaeger who met them both at my house when he last visited us here. Freyberger was courting at that particular time and spent the evening with us.

I have just received a deputation from the local rating authority. The gentlemen wished to satisfy themselves that I was not in fact paying more than, £85 for the house, the reason being that the last tenant had paid £130, while the rates for the house are based on an annual rental of £110. Needless to say I protested. I showed the gentlemen all the documents and shall now see what they do. Out of the eight houses close by, four are empty and so I hope they will deal mercifully with me.

Well then, I have ordered 11/2 dozen No. 1 and 11/2 dozen No. 2 sherry as per samples.

As you have said nothing further about it, I assume that Walter[3] has passed his exam and I send him my congratulations. Even heartier con- gratulations to Elsbeth[4] on her forthcoming marriage. But she must also tell me the day, so that we over here can also indulge ourselves in her and her bridegroom's[5] honour.

Much love, then, to Emma[6] and all your children, your sons and daughters-in-law and your children's children.

Your old

Friedrich

I shall pay for the sherry in May and debit it on delivery.