---
id: MECW50-013
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, November 4, 1892"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 November 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in the language of the original (English) in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959 Reproduced from the original Published in English in Marx-E"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 4 November 1892

My dear Löhr,

This morning Meissner sends a remittance for £38—one-third of which *£12.13.4d.,* covers your share and is settled by enclosed cheque which please acknowledge. There are about 400 copies left of Vol. I and the second edition is in preparation. Fourth edition of Vol. I is out, and 460 copies sold, which wipe off the greater part of the printing etc. cost; only 886 Marks remain to be covered and all the receipts beyond that will be profits to be divided with Meissner.

Third Volume[1] well in hand and will not leave off until finished. This cannot be done unless I neglect correspondence, so you must excuse my brevity.

Now you ought to take seriously into consideration your impending visit to London; we have talked so much about it that at last it ought to be put into execution. We all should be so glad to see you here again once more.

I am in daily expectation of news that Pumps has had another baby. It's fully due if not overdue, she herself expected it a month ago, but she is always out of her reckoning.

I wonder whether Jack Burns did say the nonsense about the foreign working men, Huret puts into his mouth in the *Figaro?*

Now then, to work again! The day I finish that section on Banks and Credit, which has been my stumbling block for 4-5 Years (because under 3 months of *absolutely free* time it can't be done and these 3 months I could not get)—the day I finish that, there will be some consumption of alcohol—you bet!

Love from Louise.

Ever yours,

F. Engels