---
id: MECW50-080
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, April 25, 1893"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 April 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959 Reproduced from the original in Marx-Engels Collected Wor"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 25 April 1893

My dear Laura,

As for the last few days we have neither heard from you nor seen any papers with your handwriting on them, we are beginning to be anxious about your health, and the enclosed letter from Rave with the influenza atmosphere it breathes, is not encouraging either. It is this letter which puts the pen into my hands to-day. I don't know anything about any of the points he mentions.

At all events, I do not want to write to him anything which may interfere with what you have been good enough to do in the matter. Therefore

1. Herewith a portrait—but could they not secure the cliché[1] of the one which appeared in the *Illustration* (I believe) about last May? that would be cheaper.

2. The title I have no objection to, not knowing what you may have proposed or might prefer. I leave that, like the rest, entirely in your hands.

3. The proof-sheets are no use to me. I write to him that I sent his letter to you, to settle all points, and that I shall be quite satisfied if he sends the proofs to you.

I returned last night from Manchester, where I assisted at the funeral of poor Gumpert (he was cremated). He fell ill, as you heard while here, last December of angina pectoris, which, brought on embolism of the brain with partial paralysis, and succumbed last Thursday[2] to a fresh attack, after fearful sufferings.

May Day here is as confused as in Paris. The Eight Hours Committee and the Trades Council are sure to have a separate demonstration each. And in this critical period Aveling falls ill, the Hull Dock Strike intervenes and may lead to a general Dock and Shipping Strike all over the kingdom, giving Tussy more to do than she can manage—so that nobody knows how matters will go.

I hope you received Louise's[3] letter sent on Saturday,[4] and I hope moreover soon to learn that you have got over your fit of influenza.

*Salut au citoyen Représentant,*[5] if he is about. Love from Louise and from

Yours affectionately

F. Engels