---
id: MECW50-022
title: "Letter to Julie Bebel, November 29, 1892"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 November 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JULIE BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 29 November 1892

Dear Mrs Bebel,

Of all the letters I got on my birthday, yours is the first I feel impelled to answer. My most sincere thanks. I spent the day 'in the best of health', for, even though I am not in full control of my movements and cannot walk as much as I should like to, I nevertheless feel quite robust and everyone says I look very well. This time we turned my birthday into an English May Day celebration, i.e. we brought it forward from the Monday to the previous Sunday.[1] Louise felt that, as I couldn't fail to tipple somewhat on an occasion like this, one day would be enough and two days too many. We had a real houseful, our African, Sam Moore, also Bax, the Avelings, Bernsteins, Mottelers, the Russian Volkhovsky, and two working men from the Society

62; that, I think, was all. No. I nearly forgot little Inka[2] who has really filled out on the food she gets in Berlin and whose plumpness suits her very well— now I have tangible proof that people have learned how to eat their fill in Berlin and let no one speak to me in future about starving Berlin!

We still had a small supply of dried woodruff and so Louise and I con- cocted a May cup with the aid of Moselle, red wine and champagne—at this foggy time of year it would hardly be possible to imagine, let alone

brew, anything better. Since one and all had laid a good foundation in the shape of a cold meal, the said cup was valiantly attacked, not least by Your Humble Servant, the Narrator and, strictly between ourselves, several of the gentlemen, among them—I was about to say it but shall stop before it's too late—became somewhat the worse for wear. Julius[3] was in great form; he sang various songs and told funny stories though, with his customary obstinacy, indulged in nothing but water or coffee. In short, we were all very jolly until past midnight, which is saying a great deal, considering the distances here in London and the fact that all railway and omnibus services close down after 11 o'clock on Sunday night. And so I was able to retire to bed secure in the knowledge that I had entered my 73rd year in a worthy fashion. However I hope that my health will allow me to do even better next year. Then my birthday falls on a Tuesday, and so we shall again be able to make a start on Sunday, though in that case I should like to carry on carousing until Tuesday night.

I should like to have attended that beanfeast in Berlin. Inka tells me that she could not get through to you and Bebel because of the crush so there must have been an enormous number present. 63 Still, I don't doubt that I'll witness something of that kind again, if not this year then the next, provided that is, you come over and fetch us. The little Fischer girl *sees* in you so great a mental affinity with my dear good Lenchen that I can be doubly confident in placing myself in your charge.

As August left only *one* measly page for your use, I shall reverse the position and he will get only one from me.

With warm regards

Yours,

F. Engels