---
id: MECW50-049
title: "Letter to August Bebel, January 24, 1893"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 January 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published abridged in: F. Engels, Politisches Vermächtni. Aus unveröffentlichen Briefen, Berlin, 1920 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Extra"
status: raw
---

*To Bebel in Berlin*

Dear August,

I continue. What Aveling told me confirms the suspicion I already had, namely, that Keir Hardie secretly cherishes the wish to lead the new party in a dictatorial way, just as Parnell led the Irish, and that moreover he tends to sympathise with the Conservative Party rather than the Liberal opposition. He publicly declares that Parnell's experiment, which compelled Gladstone to give in, ought to be repeated at the next election and where it is impossible to nominate a Labour candidate one should vote for the Conservatives, in order to show the Liberals the power of the party. Now this is a policy which under definite circumstances I myself recommended to the English; however, if at the very outset one does not announce it as a possible tactical move but proclaims it as tactics to be followed *under any circumstances,* then it smells strongly of Champion. Especially when, at the same time, Keir Hardie refers disparagingly to the extension of the suffrage and other reforms, which alone might be expected to give reality to working-class suffrage over here, as purely political matters which must take second place after social demands—eight hours, industrial safety, etc. Though, renouncing as he does their *enforcementhy* Labour M.P.s, he fails to explain how these social demands are to be implemented unless by grace of the middle classes, or else by means of indirect pressure exerted by Labour's casting vote in the elections. I draw your attention to this knotty point in order that you may be informed should occasion arise. For the time being I do not attach any particular importance to the matter since at the very worst Keir Hardie is likely to err gravely in his estimate of the workers in the industrial districts of the North of England, who are not a flock of sheep, and since he will, in any case, encounter opposition enough in the Executive. But a tendency of this kind ought not to be completely ignored.

I am very anxious to see the stenographic copy of Singer's.[1] speech on the stock exchange; it read very well indeed in the *Vorwärts*[2] But one point of this topic is easily overlooked by all our people: the stock exchange is an institution where the bourgeoisie exploit not the workers but *one another*. The surplus value which changes hands on the Exchange is surplus value already *in existence*, the product of *past* exploitation of labour. Only when that process is finished can the surplus value serve the ends of stock exchange swindling. The stock exchange interests us in the first place only indirectly just as its influence, its repercussion on the capitalist exploitation of the workers, is felt only indirectly, and in a roundabout way. To ask that the workers should take a direct interest and wax indignant over the way the landlords, manufacturers and petty bourgeois are fleeced on the stock exchange means demanding that the workers should take to arms in order to protect their direct exploiters so that they can remain in possession of the surplus value which they had filched from these self-same workers. No, thank you. But as the finest fruit of bourgeois society, as the hearth of extreme corruption, as the hothouse of the Panama[3] and other scandals — and therefore also as an excellent medium for the concentration of capitals, the disintegration and dissolution of the last remnants of naturally formed interconnections in bourgeois society and at the same time for the annihilation of all orthodox moral concepts and their perversion into their opposites, as an incomparable means of destruction and as a most powerful accelerator of the impending revolution — in this historical sense the stock exchange is also of direct interest to us.

I see the Centre[4] has moved that there be a stay of prescription for the period in which the Reichstag suspends prosecutions. Since the Centre is the dominant party the motion seems likely to be carried.[5] *Should* this happen, it would seem to me inappropriate to make the government a gratuitous present of the above limitation of parliamentary rights without any *quid pro quo*. The *quid pro quo* should consist in the express acknowledgement that the Reichstag's right of suspension is also applicable to penal detention. Otherwise the Reichstag would again be beating a retreat— whatever legal plausibility the measure might seem to possess.

The bogey of war has again raised its head. Herewith Dalziel's despatch from today's *Daily Chronicle*—as a youthful competitor of Reuter, Wolff and Havas, Dalziel is more readily open to such reptilian manoeuvres.[6] The affair as such is absurd. The Russians are simply not prepared for war and would have to be quite off their heads to embark on one now. There is, of course, a possibility that, after the failure of the last Parisian loan,[7] they would only be able to obtain money in Paris if war were really imminent or had already broken out—but that would be a counsel of despair. What cannot be completely ruled out is the possibility that the Opportunists[8] and Radicals[9] in France will seek to save themselves from Panama by means of a war or at any rate have this at the back of their minds as a last recourse. But where could they find the pretext that would justify them in the eyes of the world? As I have said before, in the next war England will play a dominant role on account of its naval supremacy.[10] And as it happens, England has just played a nasty trick on the French in Egypt.[11] To gain England's support, in the present state of tension between the two governments, there would have to be a *casus belli* which, even to your philistine, would seem a gross provocation, and this Caprivi will not provide.

The more information I gather on this point, the more I am struck by the fact that Bismarck formed the Austrian *resp*. Triple Alliance.[12] simply in order that he might, on the eve of the now inevitable war, give Austria to Russia in exchange for France: Leave me France and I'll leave you Austria and Turkey and, what's more, unleash Italy against Austria via Trieste and Trient.[13] And he clearly imagined he would pull it off. Reflect for a while on the course of history since 1878[14] and you will, I believe, come round to my view.

To me Tutzauer's hire-purchase speech in the Reichstag Report (*Vorwärts*) of the 21st is quite incomprehensible. He wasn't speaking as a Social Democrat but as a furniture salesman.[15] How could this have happened? The Young[16] will be overjoyed.

Last night there was a concert and ball for the benefit of the Society.[17] I stayed until 11 o'clock and shall now presumably be exempted for a while from such obligations; Louise[18] had to stay at home because of neuralgia in her side. She is a bit better, but still suffers a lot of pain which, Freyberger says, will persist for another day or two. Otherwise her cold is on the mend and her voice and general condition have also improved. She sends you and your wife her warmest regards, as does

Your

F.E.