---
id: MECW50-040
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, December 28, 1892"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "28 December 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in Wilhelm Liebknecht, *Briefwechsel mit Karl Marx und Friedrich Engels,* The Hague, 1963 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Colle"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BERLIN

London, 28 December 1892

Dear Liebknecht,

A Happy New Year to you, your wife[1] and your children. As regards the French, I pointed out to Lafargue more than a week ago that now's the time.[2] However, it's quite possible that the chaps don't want to expend their powder too soon. To begin with, the Panama affair[3] is still in its early stages, the more important revelations won't come till after the New Year, and so far nothing serious has been *proven,* legally speaking, against any living parliamentarian; in January, both Radicals[4] and Monarchists may find themselves well and truly in the soup and then it will be possible to speak up far more effectually. Secondly, there are, in the Chamber, not only Marxists but also Blanquists,[5] Allemanists[6] and free lances *à la* Cluseret— not to mention complete reprobates such as Lachize and Thivrier who have latched on to our coat-tails—and, with the socialist groups in Parliament differing as they do, it would be easy for the others to give them as good as they got, so to speak. Now an attempt is being made to find a common basis for action. If this succeeds, as seems probable, it will be easier to get something done.

I tender this merely as a possible explanation for the chaps' silence. In this country we have long had to contend with Bonnier's enthusiasm. He fairly peppered us with shot over the May Day business.[7] I drew his attention to your statement in the *Vorwärts* in which you said that at Marseilles you had given the chaps advance notice of what the Germans' attitude would be on 1 May '93, and that they had declared themselves satisfied.[8]

So they have no right to complain. I then went on to tell him that, what with Panama in Paris, the military business in Berlin[9] and a general industrial crisis into the bargain, there might be something better for us to do on 1 May than demonstrate. Indeed, in Paris he would subsequently seem to have realised as much. The man has the best of intentions, but anyone wanting to have a finger in the pie of the labour movement of three countries has no business to live in Oxford. Cordial regards to you all,

Your F. E.

*[Postscript from Louise Kautsky]*

Dear Mrs Natalie,

May I associate myself with the General's[10] letter and his good wishes. Having myself answered the question in the affirmative, I wish you, your dear husband, and your children a very Happy New Year.

Sincerely yours,

Louise Kautsky