---
id: MECW50-173
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, May 11, 1894"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 May 1894"
year: 1894
publication: "First published, in Russian, in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966 Reproduced from the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected W"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 11 May 1894

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear Laura, Just two lines. Have the proofs of the *Discours sur le libre échange*[1] gone to Milan? If not, do please see that they are sent *at once.* Turati has published in the *Critica Sociale* a text which is a *traduction*[2] from the Russian of something made out of something in German,[3] and moreover so abbreviated that it is anything but Mohr. Now they threaten to publish this *en brochure.* And unless they get the French text soon, I shall not even be able to haul them over the coals for it, as they are doing 'their text'!

Surely it will be possible to make our French friends to treat business as business for once!

Just come back from town where we sent off the *last* of the Manuscript of Vol. III,

If you get the *Neue Welt* with the *Vorwärts* or some other German paper, look at 'Aus finsteren Zeiten' in No. 18. You will find there your grandparents and Mohr transmogrified into a romance and I wish you may relish it.

Kind regards from Louise. Monsieur Guesde neither turned up nor wrote a line of excuse, *Les français sont si polis!*[4]

Ever yours

F. E.

The *lazy woman*[5] says she is just writing 30 letters to Trades Unions and others anent an Austrian strike, and says she should be very glad of your assistance if she could have it.

Avvocato F. Turati Portíci Galleria, V. E. 23 Milano, Italia