---
id: MECW50-211
title: "Letter to Georgi Plekhanov, November 1, 1894"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "1 November 1894"
year: 1894
publication: "First published in Russian in: *Gruppa 'Osvobozhdeniye Truda',* No. 2, 1924. Printed according to the original. Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collec"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO GEORGI PLEKHANOV

IN LONDON

[London] 1 November 1894

41 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear Plekhanov, It goes without saying that I will do all I can to assist the examination of the *Neue Rheinisehe Zeitung,* etc., 413 and I do not exactly see why you should be embarrassed to speak to me frankly on the subject. At the moment my books are still not in order; this work was interrupted by a

number of other matters to be dealt with, trips into town, legal consultations, and other nuisances caused by the legal formalities and material difficulties without which it is impossible to rent a house in England, and particularly in London. Nor is it yet finished.

As my books are not organised, I can hardly begin, and therefore I must ask you to continue to have patience. However, rest assured that you will have all the books, newspapers, etc., that I am able to find on the subject that interests you. We shall discuss it on the first occasion that I have the pleasure to see you.

Yours,

F. Engels

I have just learned that a new oven range is being fitted in our kitchen, and that this will prevent us from cooking until after Sunday. We will not therefore be able to entertain you on Sunday evening,[1] since we will not be able to give you anything to eat. However, if you would like to call on any evening after eight o'clock, we can talk about the question of the books.