---
id: MECW50-011
title: "Letter to Charles Bonnier, October 24, 1892"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 October 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Printed according to the original Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Mar"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO CHARLES BONNIER

IN OXFORD

[Draft]

London, 24 October 1892 My dear Bonnier,

In *Le Figaro* Guesde says:

'Just as Liebknecht stated that, in the case of aggression by France, he would be obliged to remember that he is German, we would remind the workers' party, in the case of German aggression, that we are French'.

Thus Guesde and myself are in perfect agreement, and it is with him that you should settle matters.

You speak of an *unfortunate* phrase by Bebel—which one? You reproach him with so many! If it is the one in *Figaro* that he would fire at Guesde, it belongs to M. Huret; Bebel writes that it existed only in this gentleman's fantasy.

You talk of preventing war, and you boast of having voted for Domela 34— with his plan you would crush all the socialist parties in Europe.

It is all very fine to speak of preventing a war, from whichever side it might come. But why allow yourself to believe in illusions. Do the French socialists have some means of preventing the young William[1] from declaring war in a moment of madness? Can the German socialists forbid Carnot or some patriotic ministry to commit a similar folly? Furthermore, if it were William or the street-corner revanchists who were the real danger; it is the Russian government which is pulling the strings of these puppets, these by hopes, those by fears. So now prevent it from inciting war!

If war breaks out, *those who are defeated will* have the opportunity and the duty to bring about a revolution—and that's that.