---
id: MECW50-330
title: "Letter to Eleanor Marx-Aveling, July 21, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: "Samuel Moore (translator of Das Kapital)"
written: "21 July 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 39, Moscow, 1966 Reproduced from the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume "
status: raw
---

SAMUEL MOORE TO ELEANOR MARX-AVELING

IN LONDON

[London,] 21 July 1895[1]

2 Stone Buildings Lincoln's Inn, W. C.

My dear Tussy,

I felt very anxious to know how the General was getting on, so went down to Victoria to meet the 7:15 p.m. from Eastbourne this evening by what train Dr. Freyberger generally returns.

I met him and I am sorry to say that his report is anything but cheering; he says that the disease has attained such a hold that, considering the General's age, his state is precarious. Apart from the diseased glands of the neck there is danger either from weakness of the heart or from pneumonia—and in either of these two cases the end would be sudden. He may go on for some weeks if pneumonia does not intervene, but if it does then it will be a question of a few hours. In spite of all, however, the General is quite hopeful and is certain that he will recover—he intends, and has arranged with the 2 doctors, to return to London on Wednesday evening[2] so that if you want to see him you had better go to 41 R.P.R. on Thursday.

This is sad news and I trust the doctors may be mistaken. There is so much work to be done which the General alone is capable of doing, that his loss will be irreparable from a public point of view—to his friends it will be a calamity.

I have just time to write this in haste.

Yours very sincerely

S. Moore