---
id: MECW50-250
title: "Letter to Victor Adler, January 12, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 January 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published in *Victor Adlers Aufsätze, Reden und Briefe. Erstes Heft: Victor Adler und Friedrich Engels*, Vienna, 1922 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volu"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER

IN VIENNA

London, 12 January 1895

Dear Victor,

My last letter was sent to you at Schwarzspanier[1] on the 9th of this month. Today, simply as a precaution, I am again notifying you that yesterday Louise addressed a registered letter to you at Ferstelgasse 6,[2] containing a

CHEQUE for 3,500 gulden drawn on the tenth of this month by the Anglo-Foreign Banking Company Ltd. on the Union Bank of Vienna to the order of Dr Victor Adler, *payable dans les huit jours*.[3]

If you have received this safely, would you please drop a line to Louise informing her of the fact so that she may pass on the information to the chaps over here and thus set their minds at rest. Then the formal document with its various signatures can follow.[4]

But if you have not received the CHEQUE, then hasten at once to the Union Bank and STOP PAYMENT. Unfortunately the international postal services do not admit of a declaration of value or insurance, hence a certain amount of anxiety prevails over here.

As regards Marx, I have searched through the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* and all I have found is this: The issue of 25 Aug. 1848 states that 'yesterday K. M. left for Vienna where he will be spending a few days'. (Not from Cologne, mind you; he had already gone away and it was, I think, from Hamburg that he arranged for the insertion of this notice.) And then there is a later piece of news, 31 August from Vienna, to the effect that Marx gave a lecture yesterday at the Vienna Workers' Association in Josefstadt on social conditions in Western Europe (Stifft spoke after him, at the same Association) (*Neue Rheinische Zeitung*, 6 Sept.) and, according to the issue of 8 Sept., Marx spoke on 2 Sept. 'at a meeting of the first Vienna Workers' Association on the subject of socio-economic conditions'.—That is all. Meanwhile in Berlin, on 7 September, a crucial vote had been taken on Stein's motion, Hansemann's Ministry had fallen and, conflict being inevitable, Marx returned hot-foot. On 12 Sept. he wrote another leading article^a for the issue, which came out that same afternoon, of 12 Sept. 1848.

Yesterday evening Louise sent you two more items in a wrapper.

Yours,

F. E.

*Clarion* and *Labour Leader* have today gone off as before to the editorial office.

Very many thanks to you and your wife for the magnificent calendar.