---
id: MECW50-205
title: "Letter to Eduard Bernstein, September 6, 1894"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 September 1894"
year: 1894
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Marx-Engels Archives,* Vol. I, 1924 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDUARD BERNSTEIN

IN LONDON

Eastbourne, 6 September 1894

4 Royal Parade

Dear Ede,

I shall write and tell Schlüter 25 that you haven't the time and that he can reprint the piece from the *Neue Zeit.*

The errata can wait until I return on 18 September. 393 The preface^c won't be finished until later, but you can come and see it at my house before it goes off. You will find the part on the rate of profit in the book proper. There is nothing new on the subject in the preface, merely a critique of the attempts at solving it. 4° 7

As to Edwards, I would in your place first inquire from the Avelings as to *why* they refused and what they know about the man. In English the expression 'DON'T KNOW HIM' is not wholly unequivocal. If you are prepared to sacrifice the time, it would certainly be quite a good idea, if you prevent an Arndt, say, or a Hyndman, from writing the article. On the other hand contributing to an annual of this sort which has suddenly been brought into being by someone you don't know can involve you in some unpleasant experiences. The chap can't take it amiss if you ask him

for the names of the contributors he has already secured. After all, that would enable you to form a more definite opinion. 408

Pinkau is welcome to a photo as soon as I myself have got another one. As you know, Inka's attempts miscarried and since then I have not been anywhere near a lens.

Many regards to Gine and the children[1] from Louise and

Yours,

F.E.

Freyberger is in London today doing hospital duty.