---
id: MECW50-293
title: "Letter to Hermann Engels, April 12, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 April 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published in: *Deutsche Revue,* Jg. 46, Bd. II I, 1921 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HERMANN ENGELS

IN BARMEN

London, 12 April 1895
41 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Hermann,

I have heard nothing further about the sherry since it was despatched.[1] All I know is that immediately after the hard weather the two Cologne steamers *Energie* and *Industrie* were reported as having arrived here—departures are difficult to keep track of in the newspapers and I don't therefore know whether both have sailed—and if so when. If the wine doesn't turn up in the course of next week, please send me a postcard and I shall then make inquiries.

The news that the wedding had gone off so merrily and that the loving couple[2] had enjoyed their honeymoon pleased me enormously. It is all right about the 80 marks. I hope that by now you have quite shaken off your influenza. Luckily I have recovered from mine and am gradually beginning to get out and about again.

Very many thanks for the information re the Schaaffhausens. I shall be glad to take up the allotment of 1000 marks—*à* 120%. The initial payment of 700 marks will be amply covered by my balance as at 30.4.94, even after deduction of the £40 (...)^c per P.P. & Co., while accrued interest and the last Schaaffhausen dividend ought to be just about enough for the remaining payment of 500 marks. Should a few more marks be needed, you might be so good as to advance them to me pending the next dividend—i.e. assuming that I have not overlooked anything in the above calculation, in which case kindly advise me.

The conversion into bonds *à* 1,000 marks would also be perfectly acceptable to me if it could be done without leaving a tiresome or unproductive balance, something that can't be managed just now when all bonds must be in denominations of 1,000 or 450. So if the thing is impossible it would best be forgotten. But there might after all be some solution.

Well, you now have the prompt answer you wanted. For the past four days we have been having wonderful spring weather; overnight everything began sprouting and burgeoning and the warm sun in the day time is quite untypical of a normal English April with its grey skies and biting north-easters.

For the first time in my life I paid a dentist 10/6d last Monday[3] for pulling out a couple of old stumps. Now I only have seventeen teeth left, all of them in front and all of them so far complete, but nothing at the back, so I may have to be fitted with a set of false teeth!

Love to you all.

Yours,

Friedrich