---
id: MECW50-096
title: "Letter to Filippo Turati, July 12, 1893"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 July 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published abridged, in the language of the original language (French), in: *Filippo Turati attraverso le lettere di corrispondenti (1880-1925),* Bari, 1947 and in full in: *Annali,* an. I, Milan"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FILIPPO TURATI

IN MILAN

London, 12 July 1893

Dear citizen Turati,

On Saturday[1] sent back to you, by registered mail, the Italian *Capital.*[2]

Thank you. I have compared some passages, particularly in the 1^st and penultimate chapters (general tendency of capitalist accumulation). As you say, it is translated entirely from the French text, which continues to be more popular than the German. The passages I compared were translated fairly accurately, which is not very difficult given that the two languages are so closely related, and the greater freedom of movement offered by Italian in comparison to French.

I noticed that the reverse of the title page carries the legend: *proprietà letteraria,*[3] which will prevent Domanico from using this translation as it stands. 218 I still have not received any reply from him, perhaps he is beginning to realise the difficulties involved in his undertaking.

The 'last part' of which I spoke in my letter[4] is, of course, from the 2^nd volume, 2^nd edition, which will appear closer to September. The 3^rd volume is still giving me trouble, but happily the end is in sight. However, I have not achieved my goal of finishing this work before my summer holidays. And that may cause a further delay of several months.

As for the French edition of the 2^nd and 3^rd volumes, it would be rather difficult to find the translator they require. It's a job which a few people would be willing and capable and persevering to bring to completion. The 2^nd has 500 pages, and the 3^rd will have 1,100-1,200.

Poor Martignetti! Is there no way of rescuing him from this *benedetto*[5] hole of Benevento, and finding him some occupation in a place where he could also learn the literary language of his country? He displays extraordinary assiduity and willingness. He translates for me with a fanaticism worthy of a better cause; but it seems he has little success in business affairs, and an unlucky star has followed him everywhere.

Will we see each other in Zurich? 189 Good Lord, if all goes well I might be able to be in Zurich at least for the last day of the Congress; that is my plan; however, as it does not entirely depend on me but on a combination of more or less fortuitous circumstances, it is very uncertain, and we would both probably do well not to speak of it. If there is something which frightens me, it is your threat to speak to me *en Meneghino.*[6] In 1841 I spoke it passably well, and understood it perfectly. 219 However, when, about thirty years later, I found myself at Como 233 for a day or two, I did not understand a single word; my ear had completely lost the habit. Thus I can say in all truth that I still speak a few words of your so very expressive dialect, but I understand nothing at all. As for your French, it is still better than mine, and in any case nothing prevents you from writing to me in Italian.

Do you read English? If you do, I could send you a newspaper from time to time.

*Salut cordial*[7]

Yours,

F. Engels

Greetings to Mme Kulishov from Mme Kautsky and myself.