---
id: MECW50-259
title: "Letter to Victor Adler, January 28, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "28 January 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published abridged in *Arbeiter-Zeitung,* No. 327, 28 November 1920 and in full in *Victor Adlers Aufsätze, Reden und Briefe.* Erstes Heft: *Victor Adler und Friedrich Engels,* Vienna, 1922 Publ"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO VICTOR ADLER

IN VIENNA

London, 28 January 1895

Dear Victor,

Many congratulations from myself and everyone else here on the rapid success achieved by the *Arbeiter-Zeitung*[1] It was no more than I expected, but to see it confirmed in actual fact is, of course, also worth a great deal.

There is no need at all for you to worry about the editorial side. During the early weeks you, as organiser, are infinitely more important than you would be as actual editor. Once everything is going smoothly, you should have no difficulty in striking the right note in the paper. You are quite right about it's being a mite too serious. A bit more humour, particularly on the front page, *which* used always to be very funny in the twice-weekly edition, would do no harm at all. However, that will come.

A direct telegraph service from foreign capitals would be of absolutely no use to you. That would mean your having a properly organised office in every city with a chief correspondent to run it professionally, and solely on your account; here in London this would cost between six hundred and a thousand pounds a year, and even so you wouldn't be getting the best news from ministerial or opposition circles, for the simple reason that you are only accorded priority and given news of this sort *ahead of* everyone else and before it has become common property if you are able to reciprocate by giving your informants your support and publishing the ready-made puffs they send you. But that is just what our press cannot do. So, where news from official circles is concerned, you will never be able to compete with the big bourgeois papers who not only monopolise the sources but can also organise news-gathering services on a footing similar to that of big industry.

It's hard luck, your having to content yourselves during the first few weeks with the little provincial assemblies, but the Diet will soon be meeting again and then you will have plenty of material, whereupon your personal intervention will again become necessary.

The differences in the Ministry here are of no great account so far as their practical consequences are concerned. The Liberal government contains as many shades of opinion as it has members. Now that the big bourgeoisie together with Whig aristocrats)[2] and the university ideologues have gone over to the Conservative camp (a process which began after 1848, gained impetus after the Reform Bill of 1867[3] and became very marked after the HOME RULE BILL[4], Liberalism has been largely an omnium gatherum of all the sects and sectarian crotchets in this sect-ridden country. And since each individual sect considers its own particular crotchet to be the one and only panacea, the result is constant strife.

But of greater moment than that strife is the certain knowledge that only cohesion vis-à-vis the outside world can keep them in power for a few months longer. Consequently it is a matter of pure chance which tendency may gain the upper hand.

I have been sending you in rotation copies of the three labour newspapers which still survive here. Since you get the *Clarion* by way of exchange I shall spare you this in future. There is nothing much in any of the three but nevertheless it's advisable that you should take a look at one or the other from time to time. The *Labour Leader* is an institution for the idolisation of Keir Hardie; he is a cunning, crafty Scot, a Pecksniff and arch-intriguer, but too cunning, perhaps, and too vain. The financial sources he draws upon to keep the paper going are of a dubious kind, which might cause unpleasantness when the new elections are held.

Apropos. *Not a single* copy of Thursday evening's issue[5] (confiscated) arrived here. But nevertheless I should like to read the article, *K. M. in Wien*[6] Could you get hold of another copy for me? That was an astounding piece of cheek, by the way your announcing the confiscation to have been so extraordinarily effective that it enabled you to save yourselves the expense of another, quite unnecessary, edition.[7] You people are lucky in Austria—if you were to say something like that in Prussia they would promptly chuck three Subversion Bills[8] at your head.

We shall be sending you extracts from Crawford's Paris letters whenever they contain something of interest. I would specially call your attention to them. She has been in Paris for over forty years, knows every mouse in the place by name, possesses dossiers on the career of every politician and is a good judge of character. No one in Paris can equal her knowledge of personalities and you would therefore be well-advised to file away for future reference even those articles for which you have no present use. Over and over again she has seen all her Radical and Republican friends plunge into the mire of corruption and has thus, bourgeois though she is, acquired a remarkable sympathy for Socialists. She has one unshakeable conviction, however, and that is that J. Guesde is Marx's son-in-law.

Yesterday I sent you another excerpt from one of her articles.[9]

Louise has been especially gratified by the unequivocal rejection of the petitions of the Women's Union—see Clara Zetkin's article in the supplement to Thursday's *Vorwärts*.[10] Clara is right and did after all manage to get the article accepted in the teeth of long and determined opposition. Bravo Clara!

Love from Louise and Ludwig and the baby who always yells with glee whenever the *Arbeiter-Zeitung* arrives, and from

Yours,

F.E.