---
id: MECW50-099
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, July 20, 1893"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "20 July 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, 1891-1895, Paris, 1959 Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 20 July 1893

My dear Löhr,

*D'abord*[1] thanks for translation of the *Chronicle* Interview—though it was hardly worth while. 239 And then an inquiry.

Some time ago Bonnier sent me a letter from a Diamandy (Roumanian) asking me to write for a new Review[2] of his and announcing me that they had anticipated my permission and translated for the 1^st No., *which they would send,* the chapter on Barbarism and Civilisation. 240 I waited but received nothing. Then, a few days ago, I wrote, saying that I had not had the review 25 but anyhow had no time to write for him.

After that they send *to me* a *Separatabdruck*[3] of that chapter stating on the cover that they intended publishing the whole first in the review and then in book-shape. But the review they did not send to me, but to *Tussy.* From her I got it this afternoon and see that I am quoted as a regular contributor along with Kautsky, Paul, and others who perhaps were not asked any more than myself—that however articles by Guesde and Paul are promised and Paul's essay on Mohr's Materialism[4] is reprinted in part.—The translation of my chapter seems to be Roy's. Now, all that, along with Léo Frankel as administrateur, opens out before my bewildered eyes such a vista of possibilities and impossibilities that before taking another step in the matter I must seek information and advice at your door. Paris is *unberechenbar,*[5] but Paris *doublé de* Bucarest becomes a mystery in the third power, and I give it up.

What funny people the French government and Parliament are! Panama 60

passes off with a fizz instead of an explosion, the *coup d'état* against the *bourse du travail*[6] leaves the workpeople *blasés* and passes off quietly, but the Siamese humbug sends the very same parliamentary patriots off in a blaze of enthusiasm for Colonial Conquest—the same men who a few years ago almost killed Ferry 'the Tonkinois' because he tried to engage them on the same line! 241 Verily the bourgeoisie has outlived itself everywhere.

To-morrow Louise and I are going, for a week, to Eastbourne (address as before, 28 Marine Parade), as I feel the want of a little recruiting of strength before undertaking my trip to Germany. 189 Last year's disappointment has made me careful; I don't want to be laid up again lame in an armchair for six weeks. We leave Eastbourne Friday 28^th July and London for Continent 1^st August—meet Bebel and wife in Cologne and go via Strasburg to Switzerland where I shall meet my brother[7] and expect to be in Zürich for close of Congress 12^th or 13^th August. Thence with Bebel to Vienna and Berlin.

Will Paul and you be in Zürich? The Swiss got letters from other Parisian organisations, that the elections very likely would *not* be in August, in spite of all newspaper reports, but only in September; 156 that and the English objections decided against the application for adjournment. 232

Post-time—9 o'clock, though perhaps this will not reach you till Saturday morning!

Love from Louise and your

ever thankful 'Translated-one'.

F. Engels