---
id: MECW50-002
title: "Letter to Ludwig Kugelman, October 4, 1892"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 October 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published: in Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN IN

HANOVER

London, 4 October 1892

Dear Kugelmann,

Very many thanks for the little bit of Leibnitz. 1 As regards *Herr Vogt,*[1] please send one copy to Bebel and two to me, but if you yourself don't possess another, it goes without saying that you should keep one and send only one to me. 2

As regards *The Knight of the Noble Consciousness*[2] and *Palmerston, What Has He Done,* I have unearthed one more copy of each and these are enclosed herewith.

On the other hand I have only one copy of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung,* but no loose issues, and only a few volumes of the *Revue*;[3] if I want a complete set I have to borrow it. You had better get Miquel to return you yours. After all *he* is the only one who might now be endangered by its possession and he'll be grateful to you for taking it off his hands. However Volume I as well as other individual volumes occasionally crop up in second-hand booksellers' catalogues.

For the rest, I am keeping tolerably well. But if you are expecting an exhaustive pathological discourse on my somewhat complicated and no doubt also somewhat obscure case, I'm afraid I cannot oblige you. I am in correspondence with many doctors in 5 or 6 countries and all of them want the same sort of information. This would involve me in a medical correspondence more time consuming than my political correspondence, and that is absolutely out of the question. As it is, my work on Volume II[4] is being hampered by the business matters I have to attend to, of which there are more than enough. So do please excuse me. The whole thing is not at all serious, but merely an occasional nuisance. With my best compliments to your wife and daughter.[5]

Your

F. Engels