---
id: MECW50-266
title: "Letter to Richard Fischer, February 12, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 February 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO RICHARD FISCHER

IN BERLIN

London, 12 February 1895
41 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Fischer,

If you yourself are of the opinion that the difference in price as between 60 Pfennigs and 1 Mark will make little difference so far as sales are concerned, I am, of course, in favour of selling the edition for 1 Mark. In return for a fee of 400 Marks I therefore assign you the right to bring out an edition of up to 3,000 copies and you may start printing straight away. 507 I shall get down to the *Introduction* forthwith and let you have it very shortly. The copy I have of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitungs-Revue* came into my possession on the strict understanding that it would not leave this house, besides which it is most necessary to me for the correction of proofs, since the relevant text was corrected in *Hamburg* and contains a mass of misprints—it was copied from Marx's manuscript. It is equally necessary to me for purposes of comparison in respect of the *Introduction.* So please send me the first proofs in *galley* form and I can then insert the necessary explanatory notes. 511

N. B., thirty-six free copies should be reserved for myself; a considerable number of them have to be passed on to the heirs.

So for the time being I shall leave Lassalle's letters 284 on one side. The explanatory introduction and notes call for a good deal of rummaging about amongst my papers and I cannot therefore say in advance when it will be done.

When printing Marx's articles, please note that, in the original, *Konstitution, Klasse, Kollision,* etc. are generally spelt with a 'C but also probably with a 'K'. *Please put 'K' throughout;* that will save a great deal of Korrigiererei.[1]

Congratulations on your maiden speech; 512 it will have made the bourgeois pretty furious!

Many regards from everyone.

Yours,

F. Engels

The various pamphlets—two lots—arrived safely. Very many thanks.