---
id: MECW50-218
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue and Eleanor Marx-Aveling, November 14, 1894"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "14 November 1894"
year: 1894
publication: "First published in the language of the original (English) in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, Paris, 1959 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE AND ELEANOR MARX-AVELING

London, 14 November 1894

My dear girls,

I have to address to you a few words with regard to my will. First you will find that I have taken the liberty of disposing of all my books, including those received from you after Mohr's death, in favour of the German party. The whole of these books constitute a library so unique, and so complete at the same time, for the history and the study of Modern Socialism and all the sciences on which it is dependent, that it would be a pity to disperse it again. To keep it together, and to place it at the same time at the disposal of those desirous to use it, has been a wish expressed to me long ago by Bebel and other leaders of the German Socialist Party, and as they do indeed seem to be the best people for that purpose, I have consented. I hope that under the circumstances you will pardon my action and give your consent too.

Second. I have had many a discussion with Sam Moore as to the possi- bility of providing, in my will, in some way for our dear Jenny's children. Unfortunately, English law stands in the way. It could only be done under almost impossible conditions, where the expense would more than eat up the funds to be taken care of. I therefore had to give it up. Instead, I have left each of you *three-*eighths of the residue of my estate after defraying legacies etc. Of these, *two* -eighths are intended for yourselves, and the third eighth is meant to be held by each of you in trust for Jenny's children, to be used as you and the children's guardian, Paul Lafargue, may think best. In this way you are freed from all responsibility with regard to English law and can act as your own moral sense and love for the children may dictate.

The money I owe to the children for shares of profits on Mohr's writings are put down in my ledger, and will be paid by my Executors to the party who, according to English law, will be the children's legal representative.

And now good bye, My dear, dear girls. May you live long and healthily in body and soul and enjoy it!

Frederick Engels

Tussy will have to inform Meissner, Dietz, and the *Vorwärts* Buchhandlung[1] of Berlin that they will henceforth have to pay to *her direct* any sums due to the heirs of Karl Marx for honorarium etc. As to Sonnenschein, that will have to be settled in some other manner, the agreement about *Capital*[2] being between him and me.

F. E.