---
id: MECW50-068
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, March 14, 1893"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "14 March 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published in *Cahiers internationaux,* No. 78, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

Eastbourne, 175 14th March 1893

28 Marine Parade

My dear Laura,

Well, that was a pleasant letter of yours. So we expect you as early as possible[1] in the course of next week, and once here, we shall not let you cross the Channel again under, *at least,* a fortnight or three weeks; even if the 'honourable member'[2] could not be spared from his agitating tour for so long.

We shall return on Friday[3] to London. On Saturday Louise and I have both promised to speak at the joint Commune Celebration of the Verein 62 and Bloomsbury Society 181—a *joint* festival, though I'd rather have a good butcher's joint. The Sunday following is the Brussels Conference 172—that is to say the *second Sunday* following, viz. the 26th; you do not say whether Paul will be there though it would be *very* important, on account of certain intrigues carried on by the old clique Hyndman-Brousse-Allemane, supported, for the time being, by Seidel, the secretary of the Zurich Committee 182; evidently a last attempt is going to be made by this brokendown lot to prepare for themselves a more favourable position at the Congress. From Brussels, Bebel 183 is almost certain to come to London for a few days and maybe Liebknecht too.

Now I should be uncommonly glad to have Paul and Bebel here together for a few days in order to do away once for all with certain French prejudices against Bebel who is by far the best man we have in Germany, in spite of what the French may consider his Teutonic rudeness. So you see I have a special interest of a political character, besides the personal one, in your showing up here early in the week.

I do not at all object to a *tour de France*[4] made by Paul in an organised electoral campaign; on the contrary I consider it a capital move. But a deputy after all has certain duties in the Chamber, especially in this Panama 60 time, and as every election depends, after all, on the votes of a goodly number of *plus ou moins indifferent* philistines, it struck me that his re-election might be put in jeopardy by his neglect of his parliamentary functions. Indeed I have heard something to that effect hinted at. And when I saw his continued absence during some very important moments of the Panama crisis, I could not help thinking that he was losing some very important chances, and that all this could be brought up against him. *Apres tout,*[5] it would be too much generosity on his part to prepare seats for others and lose his own. If you were as strong in France as our people in Germany, where above twenty seats belong to us almost *et par droit de conquête et par droit de naissance,*[6] then it would be different, but then such violent campaigns would not be required either.

To-day is Mohr's dying day, and just the tenth anniversary. Well, in strict confidence I can tell you, that the 3rd volume[7] is as good as ready. The most difficult section, Banks and Credit, 33 is finished; only two more sections remain, of which only one (Rent of Land)[8] may offer *some formal* difficulties. But all that remains to be done is mere child's play to what I had to do. Now I need no longer fear interruptions. What I had not been able to get before this last winter, was 4-5 months clear of such interruptions; now I've had them and the thing is as good as done. Only don't tell anyone, as I cannot yet fix the time, within a couple of months, when the Manuscript can go to the printer's.

As to what you say of Jaurès, that fills me with terror. *Normalien et ami, sinon protégé, de Malon*[9] —which of the two is worse? And yet, neither of them is a qualification equal to the superiority of a man who can write in Latin on the origin of German Socialism.[10]

Now then I must close. The sooner we hear from you in London about the day of your arrival and the earlier you fix that date, the better. *Ainsi donc, au revoir,*[11] from Louise and

your old

F. Engels

Of course I shall send you a bit of a compromising document—a trifle of a... chèque, saving your presence! I have not got any here with me, else it would follow herewith.