---
id: MECW50-159
title: "Letter to August Momberger, March 9, 1894"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 March 1894"
year: 1894
publication: "First published, in Russian, in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST MOMBERGER

IN WIESBADEN

London, 9 March 1894

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Sir,

My reply to your esteemed letter of 26.2 has been somewhat delayed[1] by my absence from London.[2]

Things do not look very bright so far as English socialist literature is concerned. The leading publisher of books of this nature is Sonnenschein (W. Swan Sonnenschein & Co., Paternoster Square). While there is a lot of inferior stuff amongst his SOCIAL SCIENCE SERIES, it also contains the following:

W. Morris and E. B. Bax, *Socialism, its Growth and Outcome;*

E. B. Bax, *The Religion of Socialism;* do.,

*The Ethics of Socialism;* Aveling, E. AND E. M[arx-Aveling], *The Working Class Movement in America;*

Lafargue, *The Evolution of Property;* E. B. Bax, *Outlooks from the New Standpoint;* Hyndman, *Commercial Panics of the 19th Century;*

Engels, *The Condition of the Working Class in England in 1844;* do.,

*Socialism, Scientific and Utopian* etc. Again, the value of these things varies greatly. There is also a multitude of shorter propaganda pamphlets of *very* varied quality, some being really good, some deplorably bad; none are easily obtainable through book shops. Most were published by the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION[3] and the FABIAN SOCIETY.[4]

There is no journal similar to the *Neue Zeit in* this country. The socialist weeklies are:

*Justice* (organ of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION), publisher H. Quelch, 37a, Clerkenwell Green, London, E. C.

*Workman's Times,* 59, Tile St., Manchester (MANCHESTER LABOUR PRESS SOCIETY).

That is about all the information I can give you. I fear, however, that the sort of Englishmen you meet in Wiesbaden will be unlikely to provide many suitable candidates for our party.

Yours very truly,

F. Engels