---
id: MECW50-063
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, February 25, 1893"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 February 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published in *Cahiers internationaux,* No. 78, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 25 February 1893

My dear Laura,

You know the saying that the most important part of a woman's letter always is the postscript. But it's an infernal calumny, and I am going to prove it. In my last letter I not only did not put the principal subject in the body of the letter, but not even in the postscript, and have now to send it in a separate note.

And this is, about your silver wedding here on the 2nd of April. You know you have promised, and I keep you to your word. Now as it is as likely as not, or rather more likely, that Paul will have to go to the Brussels Conference, March 26th, 172 would it not be the best if you came direct from Paris about the same time he goes to Brussels and left him to come over from thence? Unless you prefer going with him and having a look at your native place which I am told has much improved in order to show itself worthy of the honour you conferred on it.

Anyhow it seems to me that it is getting time to make some preparations for the happy event, and so, not being able, or rather having forgotten to add this postscript to my last letter to you, I now tack it to the letter for Paul and hope you will take it into your most serious consideration and let us know your pleasure as soon as may be convenient.

Love from Louise and

Your ancient admirer F.

Engels