---
id: MECW50-053
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, January 29, 1893"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 January 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN BERLIN

London, 29 January 1893

Dear Liebknecht,

Herewith a small token of my 'serious loss of strength' on the evidence of which you will, I trust, 'hourly await my demise'.[1] Where did this nonsense originate? I should like to discover who the scoundrel is!

I have so arranged the article[2] as to enable you to publish it either in three numbers[3] or in a supplement; the latter might perhaps be best. I haven't signed it, for otherwise I should inevitably put the chaps in Rome onto the track of my Italian source.[4] The man has been insufficiently cautious in his conduct of the correspondence which has evidently been subject to rigorous surveillance. Moreover I still don't know whether the relevant documents are in a safe place abroad and so it is essential to avoid doing anything that might deliver them up into the hands of the Italian government.

I have mentioned names only where the facts relating to them have already appeared in the Italian press and could therefore be produced as supporting evidence. The only exceptions are the *two* names *Arbib* and *Martini* on p. 3; I could provide no supporting evidence for these, so if you have misgivings delete them.

The bearer of the revered name is Menotti Garibaldi, a lad who has already been hard at work for *years past* founding all sorts of things.

Not long ago the *Vorwärts* alluded to Bonghi the *Republican*[5] —the man is an arch-reactionary and an ex-minister of the *Right.* All in all, the *Vorwärts* has been notable for such mistakes regarding foreign countries, *not least England!*

Give my regards to your wife and children.

Your

F.E.