---
id: MECW50-239
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, December 29, 1894"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 December 1894"
year: 1894
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III (1891-95), Paris, 1959 Reproduced from the original Published in English for the "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 29 December 1894

41 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear Löhr,

Thanks for your news of the 23^rd about the Allemanists 21 and their dissensions—this sets me up again as far as the *personalia* of the Parisian movement are concerned. I hope the whole set of Allemanists will soon be smashed up and whatever is decent among them joining our people who, if they wait patiently, seem to stand the best chance of absorbing gradually all the rest.

May the new dailies flourish 449 and soon bring forth a Parisian daily! As to the preface to the French *Manifest,'**)[1] ***** my proposal would be that you work out some sort of preface out of the four German ones, giving such information about the fates of the work as may interest your readers, then send me the Manuscript for additions to be proposed by me (I have just received an Armenian translation[2] to which I might add a few words in my own name. 450 Don't you think that would solve the difficulty?**

Last Sunday Tussy being in Manchester sent me your letter to her about Vol. IV. 443 I am quite willing and shall be glad to assist her if she will undertake the work of writing out the original Manuscript.

As to what you say about Mohr's papers and their treatment in case of my death, the matter is simple enough. All these things I hold *in trust for you,* that you know; and consequently on my death they revert to you. In the last will I made (when Sam Moore was here last time but one) there is no special provision, but in the instructions to my executors accompanying it, there is a distinct direction to them, to hand over to Tussy, as the administrator of the will, the whole of Mohr's Manuscripts that are in his own handwriting, also all letters addressed to him with the sole exception of my own correspondence with him.[3] And as Tussy seems to have some doubt about the matter, I shall as soon as Sam Moore comes back in Summer ask him to draw up a new will in which this is distinctly and unmistakably declared. If you have any other wish please let me know.

Adler writes about Paul's correspondence for the daily *Arbeiter Zeitung:* 'was Lafargue anlangt

so

habe

ich

nichts

gegen

*französische* Korrespondenzen, ich werde viel übersetzen müssen. Natürlich wird Frankel regelmässig schreiben—Lafargue ist ein Korrespondent wie ich es für den *Vorwärts* bin, selten, aber dann lang. Nun wäre mir ja mit seinen geistsprühenden Artikeln sehr gedient, wenn ich nicht fürchtete dass er mir dieselben schickt wie an *Vorwärts* und *Echo.'**[4] ***** Kannst Du arrangieren dass er mir *etwa zweimal im Monat* oder bei besondern Anlässen schreibt, so wäre es mir ein grosser Gefallen, wir können nur nicht viel zahlen, 20 fr. für den Artikel müsste ihm genügen.'[5] **

There. Paul might write to Vienna during the odd week when he does not write to Berlin, and on some other general subject.

We have not been able to see anything in the English papers about G. Richard's election. 451 Is he *en ballottage?* Your figures 1,802 votes do not look very encouraging.

In Germany we shall have a busy year. We drank the *Umsturz-Kaisers 428*jolly good health on Christmas day so he will now perhaps be satisfied.

A very happy and pleasant New Year to you and Paul from all of us here!

Ever yours

F. Engels