---
id: MECW50-271
title: "Letter to Julius Motteler, March 2, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "2 March 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JULIUS MOTTELER

IN LONDON

[London,] 2 March 1895

41 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Julius, I am returning Meyer's[1] letter herewith, also one written to me by Lütgenau of Dortmund on the same subject,[2] which I should like to have back. The man is the right Barlen, Barlwin being, presumably, merely a misnomer by people who have never seen the name in writing. He *was able* to give the name of the confidential agent Bochum, and also confirmed what Meyer had written concerning Kritzler and the money—although that money, ten marks, he said, had fallen into the hands of the police. On the first occasion I gave him three shillings and, when he came back today, ten shillings, but he said he would have to give it all to his *landlord and* would then be penniless, so I gave him another five shillings, eighteen shillings in all, but even that will leave him in dire straits—he's living in a robber's den in the seamen's quarter, and is suffering from laryngitis and can't talk, so that I wasn't able to subject him to a long interrogation.

Even if the Society 62 is unable to do anything else, it could at least take care of the poor devil to the extent of getting him out of the seamen's district and helping him to find lodgings in which he wouldn't be so exploited and from which he could look around for work; and surely the chaps could give him a modicum of assistance. He should, at any rate, have an address to which letters could be sent. Anything that goes to his present diggings probably falls into the clutches of the landlord. In view of your illness and the Coheniad, 524 I would have come to see you myself about this business, but I am again suffering from one of those attacks I get in the spring and which temporarily prevent me from walking.

Apropos of which, I should like to say how very sorry I am that you and your wife should be ill. I wish you a speedy recovery and congratulate you on the merciless thrashing you inflicted on the great anarchist.[3] Let him take to his bed again alongside Kropotkin.

Many regards to you and your wife from

Yours,

F. Engels