---
id: MECW50-118
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, October 13, 1893"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 October 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, Paris, 1959 Printed according to the original Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Marx-Eng"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 13 October 1893

My dear Lafargue,

Is the Paris letter in today's *Vorwärts* from you? This is why I am asking. When I was in Berlin,[1] Liebknecht said he was arranging to take you on as correspondent for *Vorwärts,* but that the money had still to be voted by the Party Committee; in the meantime he asked me to tell you that it was a matter of regular work, of letters to be sent at stated intervals, once a week or a fortnight, for example, something which so far he had not been able to get from his French correspondents. I promised I would write to you about it as soon as he let me know that the matter had been clinched between you two.

I used the opportunity to reproach him for setting such store by any anti-Russian article of Vaillant's,[2] which he always faithfully reprints, whereas far more robust anti-Russian articles, published by *Le Socialiste* over a long period, have been passed over almost unnoticed by him. He apologised and promised to do better.

But he has not written a word about the matter of your correspondence, and he goes on translating and making much of Blanquist statements, even translating the *Chauviere.*[3]

He has, moreover, reprinted an article by young *Arndt,*[4] although this chap voted all the time with Argyriadès & Co. against the Germans at Zurich.[5] And Arndt is on the Blanquist revolutionary Central Committee.

So as you see Liebknecht leans very strongly towards the Blanquists. I'm not looking for reasons, I simply state the fact. Hence it is important that you should do everything, in despite of him, to maintain the position you have always held in relation to the German party: that of its main allies in France, who have first claim to be taken into consideration in relations between the German party and the French Socialists in general. And, to this end, you must be represented on *Vorwärts,* so that the Paris correspondence should be, at least to some extent, in your hands.

Of course the decision does not rest solely with the editorial board. The Executive Committee has something to say. And I am convinced that you will find support there, if it is needed. It goes without saying that I shall do my utmost to ensure the continuation of a close alliance between the German party and your party in France (which will not commit you to taking their money, that can always go to the Blanquists, if you don't want any more of it,[6] as you say; they will be delighted to take it). So let me know how far you have got with Liebknecht concerning your appointment as regular *Vorwärts* correspondent; and without delay, for, if there are difficulties, I must be able to take steps *before* the Cologne Congress on the 22^nd of the month.[7]

Going by *Le Socialiste,* I counted on our having twelve deputies. It is true that, knowing no more than half of them even by name, I had my doubts about their reliability. But, according to your letter, you do not seem to know so far as half of them are concerned whether they are our people or not. Very unfortunate. With 12 sound chaps, led by Guesde, we should soon have been able to compel the Blanquists,[8] Allemanists,[9] etc. to fall in with us. But if we can look to only half-a-dozen reliable people, we shall have to treat with these gentlemen on a more or less equal footing, in which case the old divisions may continue, or else, if there is unity, it will be achieved at the price of sacrifices in matters of principle.

Certainly Vaillant seems very much more sensible since his election than he was six months ago, but will he always be sure of a majority on his Central Committee? Or else, to make sure of it, may he not have to sacrifice his personal opinion on matters of substance to the prejudices of those silly conspirators?

It is sad that you were beaten at Lille.[10] You sacrificed yourself for the party: instead of nursing your constituents by assiduous parliamentary activity, you travelled about and collected votes *for others.* But the fact remains we need you in the Chamber too; and I hope you will get the first vacant seat.

The new paper will not—like the last one—be advertised 'to appear in October', I hope?[11] Will not *La Petite République Française* bar the way? This is another outcome of the Millerand-Goblet alliance;[12] you gave them far more help than they gave you in return. It's one thing for Millerand, but Goblet! an ex-Minister and candidate for the premiership!

Tomorrow I shall write a few words to Laura *on business*—I cannot manage it today, I have been interrupted all the afternoon and it is now past 5 o'clock. In the meantime, kiss her for me.

Greetings from Louise.

Ever yours,

F.E.