---
id: MECW50-248
title: "Letter to Nikolai Danielson, January 9, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 January 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published in Russian, reproduced from the original, in *Minuvshiye gody,* No. 2, 1908 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO NIKOLAI DANIELSON 472

IN ST. PETERSBURG

London, 9 January 1895
41 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear Sir,

I have duly received yours of the 1^st December. What Mr. von Struve means by saying that Marx, *completes* but not *disproves* Malthus' theory of population I do not understand.[1] I think the note on Malthus in Vol. I, Note 75, to Chapter XXII I, I[2] ought to have been explicit enough for anybody. Moreover, I do not see, how anybody can speak of *completing* Malthus' theory today, when that theory rests upon the assumption, that *population presses on the means of subsistence,* while corn in London is at 20/- the quarter, or less than half the average price from 1848 to 1870, and when it is universally acknowledged that *the means of subsistence now press upon the population* which is not large enough to consume them! As to Russia, if the peasant is compelled to sell the corn which he ought to eat, surely it is not pressure of [excess] population which compels him to do so, but pressure from the tax-gatherer, the landlord, the kulak* etc. etc. As far as I know, the low price of Argentinian wheat has more to do with agrarian distress all ever Europe, Russia included, than anything else.

We have just learned that a savant of your city has been informed that he can have Vol. II P passed free to him on applying specially for it at the office of the Censorship. I think it as well to communicate this fact to you because it may lead you to give me instructions how to forward to you the remaining sheets which I hold at your disposal,

Yours very truly

L. K.^d

Please note change of house number.