---
id: MECW50-179
title: "Letter to Georgi Plekhanov, May 22, 1894"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 May 1894"
year: 1894
publication: "First published in Printed according to the original Russian in: *Gruppa 'Osvobozhdeniye Truda',* No. 2, 1924 Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collecte"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO GEORGI PLEKHANOV

IN MORNEX (France)

London, 22 May 1894

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

My dear Plekhanov,

Yesterday, shortly after my letter to you had left, Bernstein and Kautsky arrived at my house. That has inevitably changed my plans. I thought that I ought—even without waiting for your express permission—to read them your letter, and put them both in a position to judge for themselves of the Krichevsky business. The impression this created on them will, I believe, be everything you could have desired. Indeed, however much one might wish to remain neutral in issues and disputes within the Russian emigre community, one cannot excuse the behaviour of Krichevsky as regards the translation of the *Soziales aus Russland*;[1] after learning about the translation undertaken by Vera Zasulich.[2] As for the rest, these gentlemen knew Karl Kautsky had given his consent to the translation of his Erfurt Programme[3] however, he thought that it was to be printed in Russia, or at least, he had not the slightest idea that it would be published in Switzerland.

Ignatiev[4] is, so Kautsky told me, the pseudonym of Helfond (or some name similar to that), who is in Stuttgart. You probably know him. However, as I do not have Kautsky's authorisation to use this information, I would ask you to treat it as strictly confidential. According to Kautsky and Bernstein, it would seem that Helfond is an honourable fellow who has fallen into Jogiches' trap by accident rather than malicious intent.

Yours,

F.E.