---
id: MECW50-081
title: "Letter to Ludwig Schorlemmer, April 29, 1893"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 April 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LUDWIG SCHORLEMMER

IN DARMSTADT

London, 29 April 1893

My dear Schorlemmer,

I got your letter of 22 March and then the notification of your daughter's death. Please accept my heartfelt condolences. Your earlier letters had already prepared me for it and from what you had said it was hardly to be expected that she would survive the spring. And if, as in your case, one is constantly a witness to the suffering caused by illness, while knowing that no remedy exists, one is bound in the end to resign oneself more readily to the final deliverance. Mrs Kautsky also asks me to convey to you her sincere condolences.

Death has also claimed its victims over here. Last December Dr Gumpert suddenly went down with an incurable heart complaint and on the 20th of this month he died of it. Last Monday[1] I attended the burial, or rather cremation, in Manchester. Unfortunately I had to get back the same day and thus missed the chance of looking up Siebold or Klepsch and could not therefore glean any further information on the subject of the estate. This is another matter that will be adversely affected by Gumpert's death. He was an energetic man who, especially in the case of the ailing Siebold, managed successfully to hurry things on, and, in view of the friendly relations we had enjoyed for many years, was glad to be of help. I have heard absolutely nothing more about the manuscripts and publisher's contracts. If you are unable to tell me anything about this, I shall write to Siebold again shortly.

I recall having seen Dr Spiegel on one occasion over here years ago. I think he will make a thoroughly good job of Carl's career and attainments as a chemist. Unfortunately it wouldn't do to publish anything more than that in a scientific journal.

Your hopes for a dissolution of the Reichstag will in all likelihood be fulfilled within the next week or fortnight. Caprivi has got himself into such a fix that he probably cannot concede as much as the gentlemen of the Centre and the Free Thinkers—who are bent on compromise—could consent to without imperilling the existence of their parties. I would rather that the dissolution were postponed until 1895; by that time we shall occupy a very different position and may become the crucial party in the Reichstag. One way or the other, we're bound to benefit by it.

At Easter, or rather on Good Friday,^a a German member of the Reichstag—Bebel—a French deputy—Lafargue—and an English member of parliament—Burns—Socialists all three—met for the first time at my house. A historical milestone too.

With sincere regards from Mrs Kautsky and myself

Yours,

F. Engels