---
id: MECW50-267
title: "Letter to Richard Fischer, February 13, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 February 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume XX"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO RICHARD FISCHER

IN BERLIN

London, 13 February 1895

Dear Fischer,

I enclose the titles for the pamphlet[1] as well as for the chapters. In order to complete the three articles it will be necessary to add the passages on France from the 5th and 6th (double) issue as a 4th chapter. 513 Arranged, that is, as set out on the encl. sheet; first (in square brackets) my few introductory words, then the passage on pp. 150/153[2] as shown, then a line of dots indicating the omission and, by way of conclusion, the main passage on pp. 160-171.[3] That will provide a perfectly respectable chapter and, with the abolition of universal suffrage which served Bonaparte as a pretext in Dec. 1851, round off the whole with a pertinent conclusion without which it would remain a fragment. Tomorrow I shall get on with the introduction to the whole.[4] In Germany matters are really coming to a head quite nicely. I can hardly imagine that the Centre 71 would deliberately saw off the branch it was sitting on. But the foolishness of our opponents increases from day to day and in this respect nothing is really impossible. If the gentlemen's defection is consummated, that will mean making over the whole of the Rheinland and Westphalia to us. Regards.

Yours,

RE.

(The title should include: Reprinted from the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung. Politisch-ökonomische Revue, Hamburg, 1850)*)