---
id: MECW50-241
title: "Letter to Ludwig Kugelmann, January 1, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "1 January 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LUDWIG KUGELMANN

IN HANOVER

London, 1 January 1895
41 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Kugelmann,

I am most grateful to you, your wife and your daughter for your kind good wishes which I sincerely reciprocate. But now we had better get down to business straight away, as I am overwhelmed with correspondence, etc. 453

If I understood you aright, the collection in America was mainly to do with Marx's articles in the *Tribune.* I have two collections of these over here, of which one *at any rate is* incomplete and probably both, since the *Tribune also* published Marx's articles as unsigned leaders. A third collection could therefore only be of use to me for the purpose of completing the set and that was why I suggested at the time that it should be temporarily housed in the archives where I could always have access to it when necessary.

But you now speak of *earlier* things, i.e. stuff from the period up till 1851, and that, of course, is quite a different matter and not what I had understood you to say in Berlin. 454 These things are in fact of the utmost value and it is only the lack of them that has prevented me from bringing out a complete edition of these lesser works as well as of the articles by Marx and myself that appeared between 1842 and 1852. It has long been my wish to publish these things, once I am in some sort of a position to do so and if, therefore, you can place as many of them as possible at my disposal, you will be making your own contribution towards that end. In which case I shall resume my search for a copy of the *Rheinische Zeitung* of 1842, chiefly with regard to Marx's articles.

Please tell me again where the collection originated and, if you cannot at once get hold of the things themselves, kindly procure for me, if possible, a list of the books, periodicals, etc., contained therein, but excluding the *Tribune* articles. 455

Since the beginning of last year Mrs Kautsky has not been Mrs Kautsky

but Mrs Freyberger. Her husband is an extremely able young Viennese doctor, formerly Nothnagel's assistant, who fell out with the faculty over there because he gave lectures on practical anatomy to working men and explained to them the social causes of their ailments. He is now addressing himself to the higher realms of applied medicine in this country and will, I do not doubt, soon make a success of it, for he is far more knowledgeable than most Englishmen. In order that my domestic arrangements should not be revolutionised more than necessary, we have taken a larger house in the same road where all three' or rather four, of us (there having been the addition of a little girl seven weeks ago) live together.

So once again a Happy New Year and kindest regards to you all from Louise and myself.

Yours,

F. Engels As regards the misprint, which is itself a misprint, I shall look into the matter. 456