---
id: MECW50-295
title: "Letter to Richard Fischer, April 15, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "15 April 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published abridged in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. I, Preface, 1928 and in full: ibid., Vol. XXIX, 1946 Printed according to the original Published in English in full f"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO RICHARD FISCHER

IN BERLIN

London, 15 April 1895

41 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Fischer,

The 400 marks received with thanks. I shall change them tomorrow and distribute them to the heirs. 583

So the position as regards the essays in the old *Rheinische Zeitung* is as I feared.[1] The copyright has lapsed and only by acting swiftly can we restore our title to it. It will therefore be perfectly in order if you at once announce that the articles will be published by you and edited and annotated by me. Possibly under the title:

*Karl Marx's Early Writings. Three Essays from the (First) 'Rheinische Zeitung' of 1842. I. The Rhine Province Assembly on Freedom of the Press. II. The Same on the Law relating to Thefts of Wood. III. The Condition of the Wine-Growers on the Mosel. Edited and with an Introduction by F. Engels.[2] *

I am not quite happy about the title and should like you if possible to refrain from giving it a definite title until we have found one that is more suitable. As to the Mosel article, 584 I am sure of the facts in as much as Marx always used to tell me that it was precisely his preoccupation with the law on thefts of wood and the condition of the Mosel wine-growers that led him from politics pure and simple to economic conditions and thus to socialism. And during our conversations we always treated the Mosel article as having emanated from him. I didn't read it, as I was already in England at the time. It is so long ago since we spoke of the matter that I cannot entirely rule out the eventuality of a misunderstanding. Once I have the article in front of me, I cannot possibly go wrong.

Now as to your great scheme, 585 I think you would do best to shelve it until the fate of the Subversion Bill 428 has been decided. A library which re- issues historical documents and writings from earlier periods cannot tolerate any kind of censorship—quite literally or not at all. Still less could I consent to Marx's and my own early works being subjected to a process of emasculation, however wild, in order to conform to the conditions temporarily obtaining in the press. But in view of the fact that we used to write in a very unrestrained way and were forever justifying things which, in the territories of the German Empire, are regarded either as a crime or an offence, a re-issue in Berlin after the passing of that exemplary Bill would be quite impossible without numerous deletions.

Secondly, however, I have a scheme for again presenting Marx's and my lesser writings to the public in a *complete edition*—not, that is to say, by instalments but all at one go, in whole volumes. I have already been in correspondence with August[3] on the subject and we are still discussing it. So you might have a word with him when he gets back. I am by no means certain that an enterprise like this is really your cup of tea, nor do I know whether you, i.e. the publishing side of the *Vorwärts,* are the best people for the job—quite aside from the harassment of the press which has already inclined me to believe that we may be forced to have recourse to a publisher outside the German Empire.

Marx would *never* have consented to the issue of a work by instalments. In the case of the 2^nd Ed. of *Capital I he* once allowed Meissner to bring out seven *big* instalments, each of some seven sheets, but that was as much as he could stomach. 586 To chop up books such as *The Holy Family, Herr Vogt,* etc., into instalments of two sheets or so would certainly not do. In such cases people derive absolutely nothing from their reading and to read a work in this way, piecemeal, is conducive only to incomprehension.

The *Tribune* articles exist only in *English. 587* We survived the holiday without too many mishaps and the weather was really beautiful. Otherwise no news. As soon as you have a copy of one of the three articles from the *Rheinische Zeitung,* please send it to me straight away so that I can set to work. By registered book post or, if not, in some other manner with adequate regard for safety precautions.

Many regards to everyone.

Yours

F.E.