---
id: MECW50-012
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, November 3, 1892"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 November 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, 1891-1894, Paris, 1959 Printed according to the original Translated from the French Published in English for the first time "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 3 November 1892

My dear Lafargue,

I am plunged up to the eyes in the 3rd Volume of *Capital* which must be completed once and for all. I am working on the least edited and most difficult part: banks, credit, etc.[1] I cannot interrupt the work for anything whatsoever, otherwise I should have to start from the beginning all over again. Hence all my correspondence is interrupted and I can write you only a few words.

It is most unfortunate that you believed in Millevoye's promises, who flouted you like a good politician[2] — in future you will know that in politics such people pass for GENTLEMEN. I get letter after letter from Germany in which they complain about your absence at the critical moment and I warn you that it will be difficult to have our people undertake work for debates from which the principal speaker for whom the work is done absents himself. Publication in pamphlet form[3] will not have a hundredth part of the effect of a parliamentary speech; that's a matter on which our Berlin people are well qualified by experience to pronounce.

The least you might do would be to send a delegate to Berlin on the 14th,[4] that would enable you to have it out with our people over there. So do try to send someone; it's an expedition that will pay.

You will have seen the reports in the papers of the ghastly effects, in Dahomey, of the new projectiles.[5] A young Viennese doctor[6] who has just arrived here (ex-assistant to Nothnagel) saw the wounds made by the Austrian projectiles in the Nurmitz strike, and he tells us the same thing. There's no doubt that people in danger of being shot to bits in this manner will want to know why. It's a capital thing for maintaining peace, but also for curbing the so-called revolutionary inclinations, on whose outbursts our governments count. The era of barricades and street fighting has gone for good; *if the military fight,* resistance becomes madness.

Hence the necessity to find new revolutionary tactics. I have pondered over this for some time and am not yet settled in my mind.

I am beginning to go out again a bit. I had nearly three months as a prisoner at home; now I am starting to walk, but little and slowly; but at least I realise that it will soon be over. And about time, as I feel that the lack of exercise in the open air must come to an end. And when I am completely restored, we can, I hope, arrange things so that you and Laura give us the pleasure of spending a few weeks with us. We have so many things to discuss, and it is time Laura saw London again.

Love from Mme Kautsky.

Ever yours,