---
id: MECW50-307
title: "Letter to Editors of Rheinische Zeitung, May 22, 1895"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 May 1895"
year: 1895
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, 1946 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO THE EDITORS OF THE *RHEINISCHE ZEITUNG*

IN COLOGNE

London, 22 May 1895
41 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Editors,

The man has been found, is called James Pollitt, and is ready to do any- thing within reason. Has already supplied us with all the material to be had. The articles are in *The Hardwareman,* 11 and 18 May—stenographic reports of the sessions of the BOARD OF TRADE COMMITTEE on convict labour abroad, at which his statements were made. These are being sent to you in the original with translations of the passages relating to Braunweiler. He will further supply us with samples of the commodities produced in Braunweiler and sold over here, and also an affidavit as to the accuracy both of his statements before the Committee and of the excerpts quoted by you.

But since the material is very ample and would not lend itself to being paraphrased in a letter in such a way as to put you in a position to make full use of it in court, a personal discussion is urgently called for. This morning I therefore telegraphed Hirsch, 37 Hämergasse, Cologne: 'Most important that Hirsch, Hofrichter or lawyer come over here forthwith Engels'.[1]

It is to be hoped that someone has set off at once and will, on arrival, present himself at 41 Regent's Park Road, where he will find accommodation and thus be able to get down to work forthwith. The whole thing should be settled in twelve hours, after which he could, if necessary, leave for home.

I enclose a note of the expenses that have arisen so far and shall later let you have a full account of them.

The man who gets his London agent, S. A. Rothschild, to sell the Braunweiler products for him in this country is called Christian Abner and lives in Cologne. He would be your most important witness. He would have to be asked to declare on oath what commodities he obtains from Braunweiler and exports to England. Pollitt followed the fully laden waggons from the institution in Braunweiler to his place of business in Cologne. Abner has, in fact, had statements printed in English to the effect that he does not sell the products of convict labour, for he maintains that Braunweiler is not a prison but merely a house of correction. But such distinctions cut no ice over here.

More tomorrow, if no one has turned up by then. Kindest regards from

Yours,

F. Engels