---
id: MECW50-127
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, November 11, 1893"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 November 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "Extract: Marx Engels on Britain, Progress Publishers 1953; Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

*To Sorge in Hoboken*

Dear Sorge,

Herewith a letter to Mrs Kelley (ex-Wischnewetzky) which I would ask you kindly to forward to her. As soon as you know her present correct address, perhaps you would also be so good as to forward her the enclosed cheque for £l.12.11 of the Union Bank of London.

Read on the front page of to-day's *Workman's Times* the article by Autolycus (Burgess) about the Fabian Manifesto. These gentlemen, after having declared for years that the emancipation of the working-class can only be accomplished through the Great Liberal Party, after having decried all independent election activity of the workers in respect to Liberal candidates also as disguised Toryism and after having proclaimed the permeation of the Liberal Party by socialist principles as the sole life task of the Socialists, now declare that the Liberals are traitors, that nothing can be done with them and that in the next elections the workers should put up candidates of their own, regardless of Liberals or Tories, with the aid of £30,000 to be made available in the meantime by the Trade Unions, if these do the Fabians that favour, which they certainly won't. It is a complete confession of sins committed by these overweening bourgeois, who would graciously deign to emancipate the proletariat from above if it would only be sensible enough to realise that such a raw, uneducated mass cannot alone emancipate itself and cannot achieve anything except by the grace of these clever lawyers, writers and sentimental old women. And now the first attempt of these gentry, which was announced with beating of drums and sounding of trumpets as destined to Cause the earth to tremble, has ended in so dismal a failure that they have to admit it themselves. That is the funny side of the story.

Warm regards to you and your wife. I hope you will both get through this winter better than the last. Over here it is already starting to turn wintry.

Yours,

F.E.