---
id: MECW50-191
title: "Letter to Ludwig Schorlemmer, July 5, 1894"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 July 1894"
year: 1894
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance* Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LUDWIG SCHORLEMMER

IN DARMSTADT

London, 5 July 1894

122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Schorlemmer,

Now that the final manuscript of Volume III of *Capital* is in the printers' hands, I am once again able to turn my attention to your affairs,[1] and can let you have the much delayed reply to your note of 25.4.

There are certain snags about the continuation of Carl's major work, brought out by the Vieweg Verlag, and this also applies to all the rest of his other stuff held by that firm. When I went down to Manchester I took a look at the contracts which stipulate that if, for instance, Carl were to die before completion of the whole, Vieweg might have the work completed *by a person of his own choosing.* This is the reason for his silence and also for his failure to publish the work left behind by Carl; he obviously wishes to retain a completely free hand. Nor can he be expected to pay any further royalties. For 1. by the terms of the contract, he will pay only for mss. that are *ready for press,* i.e. no unfinished stuff, and 2. will pay no royalties in respect of new editions to which *no changes have been made.*

In short, Vieweg can do exactly as he likes and will, if he is to bring out Vol. V, in any case have to find another author for the German edition.[2]

As regards Carl's work on the history of chemistry, Siebold has written to tell me that, because of constant illness, he has not yet been able to prepare the ms. for press, nor has he yet completed his English translation.[3] The poor devil has had rotten luck with his health, his nerves being again in a very poor state, and will need a long rest and plenty of fresh air if he is to recover. As far as money matters are concerned there is no need for you to worry; they are in good hands and, as things are now, Roscoe is also in control of this aspect so that ultimately one must content oneself with the particulars he supplies in respect of payments made for work such as revision, etc. It is possible that Roscoe's task has been made somewhat easier by his having dealt with Siebold direct instead of with myself as promised, but it won't make much difference since I should in any case have had to refer him to Siebold and Klepsch in respect of all settlements and should, in the end, have had to make do with his assurances. A vital factor here is that, with the rapid advances made in chemistry, any textbook becomes out of date within a year unless constantly revised and thus, where this sort of literature is concerned, only a living author can keep his end up vis-à-vis either publishers or readers.

I had hoped I might again visit Germany this summer but shall not be able to, the reason being that precisely during the summer months and because of matters connected with my lease I must remain in the vicinity of London so as to be able to return there at any moment should need arise. Hence I shan't be able to get to Darmstadt.

Kind regards to your wife.

Your
F. Engels