---
id: MECW50-070
title: "Letter to Henry Demarest Lloyd, mid March 1893"
volume: 50
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "March 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published in Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Reproduced from the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 50"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO HENRY DEMAREST LLOYD

IN CHICAGO

[Draft]

Eastbourne, middle of March 1893

Dear Sir,

I have duly received your two favors of 3/2 and 9/3 with enclosures. I very much regret that I shall not be able either to assist personally at your Congresses or to supply the papers you ask me for. I should send them to you with the greatest pleasure, were it not that all my time is at present taken up with the manuscript of the third book of my late friend Karl Marx's great work on Capital, which I am preparing for publication. This third book ought to have been out years ago; but never until now could I secure that continued freedom from interruption which alone will enable me to finish my task. I have been compelled to decline all outside work, though ever so tempting, unless absolutely necessary. By the time your congress meets, the MS ought to go to press, but this could not be, were I to accede to your request. For the work you ask me to do ought not to be journalistic commonplace; it ought to be the very best I can furnish, it would require mature study and thought; and that means a considerable amount of time, which for the reasons given, I am not in a position to sacrifice.

I have, however, forwarded you per bookpost a copy of the English edition of the *Communist Manifesto* of 1848 (by K. Marx and myself) and another of my *Socialism: Utopian and Scientific*[1] published a few months ago, as a small tribute which I hope may prove of interest to some members of your Labor Congress.