---
id: MECW49-134
title: "Letter to August Bebel, October 6, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 October 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works,"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 6 October 1891

Dear August,

Herewidi what you need in regard to the Cuno-Leibfried case.[1]

But now I think you would be well-advised to stop bombarding poor Ede with letters about Lassalle 178; he is becoming tremendously irritable because of them and so confused over *what you people,* on the one hand, are demanding and what *he,* on the other, considers to be his duty, that this sort of thing can only make matters worse and he'll end up by producing nothing but contradictory material. You are *as much to blame as Ede* for the fact that the note[2] is *in it at all,* and to

[3]

condemn this excellent work in its entirety because of one wretched note is surely not right. I told him not to let this deflect him from his purpose, but to continue wearing the velvet glove over the iron fist and I also said that you would be grateful to him in the long run for having criticised Lassalle in this way. For it's clear to me that were you to re-read Lassalle's stuff *now,* you yourselves would be surprised at what it contains and at the faith in the false hero which, out of cour- tesy, you forced yourselves to profess when consorting with the Las- salleans at the time of the Anti-Socialist Law.[4] I'm positive that you, as also a whole lot of chaps who still cling to the Lassallean tradi- tion, no longer have any knowledge whatever of what the man said and wrote (indeed, said and wrote for the most part against his better judgment). And hence the new edition of Lassalle will have a tho- roughly beneficial effect on you people as well, provided only that you read the works of the prophet's critic.

Lafargue is not yet out of prison, but if the government *doesn't* re- lease him during election time, he will probably be elected in Lille.[5] The prospects are rosy; Delory would have got in all right at the last election had not the by now routed Boulangists collared a whole mass of working men's votes.

In Paris there could easily be a government crisis. Rouvier is a shady individual, more so than is tolerable and, now that Boulanger has met his end, Constans is no longer needed and is detested by Car- not because he wants to step into the latter's shoes. Freycinet & Co. also want to get rid of Rouvier and Constans arid so it may easily come to a split when the Chamber assembles on the 15th.

I'm glad to see that Dietz has paid you my fee. Louise asks me to tell you that the photographs have arrived; very many thanks from us all; she has taken one of the two identical ones and I the profile.

Warm regards to your wife[6] and yourself from Louise and

Your

F. E.