---
id: MECW49-239
title: "Letter to Panayottis Argyriades, beginning of July 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "July 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49 Translated from the Frenc"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PANAYOTTIS ARGYRIADES

IN PARIS

[Draft]

[London, beginning of July 1892]

Dear Citizen,

I have received the *Almanack de la Question Sociale* for 1891 and '92, for which I send you my thanks.

You hope to be able to number me amongst your contributors for 1893. However I see that, without my knowledge, you have already named me as a contributor for 1892.[1] If there is to be a contribution from me to the 1893 *Almanack,* it will, I fear, be an involuntary contribution as before. A month ago, when our friends in Austria asked me for an article for their yearbook,[2] I had to tell them

1. that I was unable to undertake any further work, whether large or small, until I had seen to the publication of Vol. III of Marx's *Capital,* which is now ten years overdue;

2. that a contribution to this or that Socialist yearbook would, in the interests of impartiality, necessitate my contributing to most of the remainder and that accordingly my time would no longer be my own.

True, I made an exception last year in the case of the French *Almanack du Parti Ouvrier.*[3] But on that occasion it would have been dangerous to hold back. That was the time when at Kronstadt[4] the official French republic kow-towed to the Tsar,[5] the hereditary leader of European reaction. War was imminent and in my view was prevented only by the famine in Russia. At that critical juncture it was up to me to do all in my power to remove any possibility of a misunderstanding between French and German working men.[6] I took advantage of the occasion and spoke up; that is all.