---
id: MECW49-173
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, February 1, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "1 February 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in *Aus Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky,* Prague, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 1 February 1892

Dear Baron,

Herewith Labriola's letter to Tussy; I don't believe that you could pull off publishing it without creating bad blood amongst divers persons in Italy, and in the end it would be the German party that would have to suffer for it, in as much as the *latter* would be held responsible for taking sides with or against those people who felt affronted by the article. For in Italy things are in such a mess that all kinds of people are sure to feel affronted, whether rightly or wrongly, as indeed I have written and told Labriola. And those people would then be driven into the arms of the Possibilists,^3 Hyndmanists, Fabians 87 and God knows what other dogs-in-the-manger.

I have written and told Labriola that I thought it better not to publish but would leave the matter entirely in your hands and that you two should sort it out between you. At all events, *Tussy wants to have the letter back.*

It recently occurred to me that an account of *Luther* based on his actions and writings is urgently called for. In the first place a rectification not only of the Protestant legend, but also of the blinkered Catholic attack upon it by Janssen (who is now doing so well in Germany) would certainly not come amiss just now, and there is a distinct need for a demonstration, from *our* standpoint, of the extent to which the Reformation was a *bourgeois* movement. Also of particular importance would be a parallel between Luther *before* and Luther *after* Karlstad, the Anabaptists and the Peasant War,[1] on the one hand and, on the other, the bourgeoisie *before* 1848 and *after* that year. Likewise a detailed demonstration of how this transformation came about in Luther's case. There's still something to be accomplished in this field, and without any need for undue study; also it's something for which you are particularly fitted as a result of your *Thomas Morus.*[2] And again you have in Stuckert[3] a library on Protestantism that is second to none. Surely that would be better than translating Rogers[4] whom any child could translate. Greetings from one family to the other.

Your

F. E.