---
id: MECW49-279
title: "Letter to August Enders, December 15, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: "Louise Kautsky"
written: "15 December 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "Published for the first time. Printed according to the original in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

LOUISE KAUTSKY TO AUGUST ENDERS

IN ERFURT

London, 15 December [1891] 122 Regent's Park Road, N. W.

Dear Comrade,

When your letter arrived yesterday, Engels was on the point of leaving. However he read your letter and asked me to reply. In the first place your letter arrived much too late for the circular to be translated and put into the papers. In this instance the bourgeois pa- pers were sooner and better advised of the Germans' intentions than were the comrades over here. To the best of my knowledge Mr Dub- lin, the German delegate, has not yet seen any of the more prominent comrades, besides which the London TRADES COUNCIL[1] has taken charge of the affair. According to today's papers there was a meeting yesterday at which not one German spoke English well enough to be able to translate. A letter from Mr Liebknecht was read out. At this stage we should only make ourselves look silly were we to tag along behind the rest in the name of the German Party and hence we might as well save ourselves the trouble. So far as I can see from the papers, the meeting went well for the compositors. The English trades unions will do everything they can. If in future you have anything of this kind, will you please send it to Bernstein first. Over here we say, as do the Avelings everywhere, that it is he who represents the German Party and in my view Döblin ought to have gone to Bernstein. Please don't regard this letter as an answer from Engels. He merely agreed that the things should not be published.

With Social-Democratic Greetings,

Louise Kautsky

Mrs Aveling, who is as familiar as anyone with English affairs, is in full agreement with what I have written.