---
id: MECW49-133
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, October 2, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "2 October 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. Ill, Paris, 1959 Reproduced from the original Published in English in full for the fi"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 2 October 1891

My dear Laura,

Today I sent to you and to Rave[1] the sheets 7 to 12 (end) of *Ursprung*[2] with the alterations marked in red. I hope this will be the end of your trouble[3] for which I do not know how to thank you. May the effect be such as to reward you to some extent for your work.

I hope Paul is out by this time, the furlough will be very useful to him and to the cause, 'le Nord' is hot and ought to be forged while it is so.

Boulanger was *so* dead that he evidently could no longer bear life. He died as he lived — *en homme entretenu.*![4] The loss of his beloved Mme de Bonnemain he might have borne, but the loss of her fortune (which the English papers say was *not* left to him) — *ah, c'était autre chose*[5]

Nobody will be more glad of this comical event than Rochefort, *le brave général* had gradually become a veritable nightmare for him.

Now, my dear Laura, what in the name of all that used to be sacred am I to write to that *Almanach*[6] where, if the advertisements speak true, there is to be more than a *Sammelsurium*[7] of men, principles and things? The progress of socialism in Germany, why that's a book! And other interesting subjects? the most interesting and most important are such that in the mouth of a *foreigner* they would appear an insult to French readers. Besides you leave me in ignorance of when the thing is wanted, and how much space it is expected to occupy. However I am fully occupied with work, urgent work so far and could not have written a scratch. So there is no time lost.

Last Monday[8] Percy brought the children over and since then we have had the whole family here. Lily has had a fall and hurt her back a little, so she is going to have a support made as a matter of precaution, and that will last a few days yet. Percy is leaving today.

Louise's Hyaena-paper[9] will not appear before 15th instant, your, Tussy's and Louise's articles will create a sensation among the women's rights women in Germany and Austria, as the real question has never been put and answered so plainly as you three do it. And both Louise and Tussy tell me they have *heiligen Schrecken vor den deutschen [Berliner] Frauenrechtsweibern.*[10] But the reign of these is not to last much longer. Bebel writes quite enthusiastically about the ardour with which the working women in Germany now rush into the movement, and if that is the case, the antiquated semi-bourgeois women's rights *ânesses*[11] will soon be ordered to the rear.

Gilles continues issuing flysheets against Edward. More in a day or two. We are trying to bring the slanders home to Hyndman who is using Gilles as his tool — and who we hope will not be able to wash off the dirt which the dirty Gilles has spattered involuntarily on the man who uses such a tool.[12]

Love from Pumps[13] and Louise and the children.

Ever yours,

F. E.

[From Louise Kautsky, in German]

My dear Laura,

Sincere thanks for your letter. As the General has told you, our 'epoch-making' paper will not be coming out until 15/X, probably due to Victor's Bohemian court proceedings. When will I get some more? since I assume that you, dear Laura, having begun with A, will also say B. Anything will be welcome to us. With warm greetings to yourself and the M. P. for Lille.[14]

Yours,

Louise