---
id: MECW49-023
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, September 25, 1890"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 September 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1959 Printed according to the original translated from the French in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 25 September 1890

My dear Lafargue,

Bebel has written to say that he is in agreement with us as regards Belgium. I have now suggested that he send out invitations to a preliminary congress 'to discuss means of preventing a repetition in 1891 of what happened in 1889, namely two rival and independent working men's congresses'; to invite everyone, Belgians, Swiss, the two Danish parties,[1] Swedes, Italians (have you any addresses?), Spaniards and English (the Parliamentary Committee, the Eight Hours League,[2] the Social Democratic Federation and the Socialist League).

As to your resolution to insist on the sovereignty of the congress in respect of only 3 questions, to wit verification of mandates, drawing up of the agenda, and method of voting, it seems to me that you are treading on distinctly dangerous ground. It means that, so far as all other questions are concerned, you accept the resolutions passed by former Possibilist congresses and that, when each case crops up, you call for a fresh debate in order to get rid of these obstacles. It means that you recognise the series of Belgian-Possibilist congresses, including the London caricature of 1888,[3] as the working men's only genuine means of international representation and that you debase ours of 1889 to the status of an act of rebellion as groundless as it was fruitless.

So consider what you would be doing. You intend to propose, with no reservations other than those cited above, that there should be one man, one vote. And at the last Possibilist congress,[4] *three* delegates from each association were admitted. True, those three were allowed only one vote, but unless all the congress's time is to be wasted on roll-calls, how can this be verified? Whoever is going to stop the Belgians' sending three delegates from each of their little associations and lording it over the congress by courtesy of your own proposal? And how many times will you be able to extract a roll-call from a vociferously impatient congress?

It seems to me that you have been carried away by the Possibilist debacle.[5] Don't forget that from now until September 1891, when the congress will probably be held, many things can happen. Why abandon the important positions we hold today? Between now and then we may be in dire need of them. Remember that there are Possibilists pretty well everywhere, not least in Belgium.

I haven't had your paper. Has it in fact come out?

Regards,

F. E.