---
id: MECW49-132
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, September 30, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "30 September 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published abridged in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A.Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and E"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 30 September 1891

Dear Sorge,

I spent a fortnight in Scotland and Ireland with Pumps and Louise Kautsky[1] after which I attended to the proofs of the new edition[2] of the *Origin of the Family;* now I am dealing with arrears of correspondence, and shall then finish off Volume III.

Meanwhile I enclose a business communication for Mother Wischnevetzky which you will, I trust, be able to pass on to her. Except by way of business I don't, of course, want to have anything to do with her.

I am sorry to see from your letter of the 15th that you are plagued with the gout. That being so, it's certainly a good thing that you should be eating less nitrogenous food and taking more physical exercise.

The Brussels Congress did in fact go off better than you suppose. The only one of the Germans to behave boorishly was Liebknecht, but he had been most grossly provoked by Nieuwenhuis in the rudest, clerico-jesuitical way. Louise, who represented the working women of Vienna, says that Nieuwenhuis' base attacks and insinuations were utterly outrageous.

The TRADES UNION Congress was also a success.[3] The 'old' unions did everything in their power to get the Liverpudlian eight hours resolution overturned and their failure to do more than whittle away a small fragment of it is of itself a defeat for them and their middle-class allies. You ought to have seen the liberal papers, in particular the Scottish ones, and the way they wrung their hands over the aberrations of the English working man and his lapse into socialism.

*The People* is quite impossible. It's ages since I have seen such a silly hotchpotch of a paper. Who has translated my *Entwicklung*? Jonas?

I'll send the necessary to the *Socialiste* and report back to you later.

Lafargue has been put up as candidate in Lille and is thus entitled to spend the 5 weeks of the *période électorale* out of prison and to engage in propaganda. He is unlikely to get in but, come the general election, he is sure of being returned in the Département du Nord.[4]

Abetted by Hyndman, Gilles continues his attempts to besmear Aveling — not a bad thing on the whole, firstly because he's such a colossal blackguard and secondly because we shall succeed increasingly in getting Hyndman out into the open. More news of all sorts by the next post.

Warm regards to your wife[5] and yourself.

Your

F. E.