---
id: MECW49-222
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, June 9, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 June 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, Paris, 1959 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 9 June 1892

My dear Löhr,

Your silence and Paul's is ominous—no news of any agreement signed on June 1st—are your intelligent capitalists after all recalcitrant? In the meantime Bax who is editor *of Justice* for 2 months, heard of your paper at Mottelers, where he met Bebel, Singer and our lot, and in spite of our precautions, cautions and remonstrances, has blabbed it out in last No.[1]

Well, I am likely to wait until I get news from you, fortunately the weather is so hot, that waiting is not so very difficult, and rather less so than any more active proceeding—in the meantime I am in the agreeable position to hand you a little cash viz. £2.18.4, one third of £8.15.- proceeds of 180 Marks sent by Dietz as share of honorarium, for Marx's heirs, of the German edition of the *Misère de la Philosophie.* The translators[2] have all at once come to the consciousness that, for the first edition of that work, Mohr's heirs were not paid anything, so I was called upon to say what they were to have for both editions now on the coming out of the 2nd edition. After some correspondence we agreed that of the 300 Marks paid for the second, the two translators were to have 2/5 =120 M. and the heirs 180 Marks = 3/5, which I believe is fair enough.[3] So herewith your cheque.

Tussy is in Plymouth for Gas Workers Annual Conference,[4] and Edward goes from there to Aberdeen, on an invitation to preach.[5]

I was in Manchester last week.[6] Poor Schorlemmer is dying. You know how changed he has been since that fall on boards the Flushing steamer which prevented his coming to Paris with Nimmy and Pumps. For the last two Christmases he could not come here. Even Easter he stopped at home and at last sent a letter: don't write, as I cannot reply! Then I wrote to Gumpert and learnt that he was getting weaker and that percussion brought out a dullness over the upper third of the right lung which, all other possibilities being excluded by the other symptoms, indicated the formation of a tumour. This diagnosis has turned out only too correct. Partial paralysis, oedema and low temperature of the right arm have set in in consequence of the pressure of the tumour on the *vena cava* and the *plexus brachialis,* while the left arm is relatively and the lower extremities perfectly free from these symptoms. His brain, too, is not quite clear, and sometimes very confused. At the same time he suffers no pain, hardly any uneasiness, and is gradually getting weaker. Gumpert thinks he may last some weeks yet, but may go off quite suddenly if any complication arises. It was impossible to converse with him more than 5-8 minutes, he wants rest, peace and quietness, and does not take any interest in anything. I hope he will be spared any sufferings. His mother is still alive, she is 81 years old.

Well, my dear girl, do give us news, even if they are not exactly what you would like them to be, we want to know what is going on.

Vaillant called here on Monday morning, but evaded all further invitations or occasions for meeting me, I shall try to find out what brought him here.

We had Bebel and Singer here for a fortnight, and were very jolly.[7] You will have received the *Pall Mall* interview we sent you.[8]

We also send you the *Elend der Philosophie,*[9] 2nd edition. Love from Louise, who would be thankful for an article,

and yours affectionately

F. Engels

Ditto to *M. le député*[10]