---
id: MECW49-022
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, September 25, 1890"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 September 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 25 September 1890

My dear Laura,

Today being your birthday will be duly celebrated with a good bottle of wine and your health drunk with musical honors — and *such* musical honors! Nim, Schorlemmer and myself, three splendid musi- cians!

Many thanks for the pears which Nim is expecting with the utmost anxiety. That 'brown fellow' of yours shall be settled before he knows where he is; as for the rest, Nim will certainly take care that their

*Lebenslauf*

*ist angefangen und beschlossen in*

*Der Santa Casa heiligen Registern*[1]

Today, the last number of the *Sozialdemokrat* is published. I shall miss that paper almost as much as the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung.* Ede is going to remain here, Tauscher left yesterday for Stuttgart; Fischer, the best of the lot after Ede, will settle in Berlin; the unspeakable muddler Motteler and his elegantly-bred missus nobody knows what to do with, so I suppose they will stay here for some time longer, though we could miss them very well — only unfortunately every- body else seems to be in that same position.

Bebel and Liebknecht have now both removed to Berlin. In case urgent communication with them might become necessary, I give you Bebel's address, the only one I have: A. B. Grossgörschenstraße, 22a, Berlin.

Fine scoundrels in Berlin amongst the nobility — one shot himself while quarreling with a *rat du ballet,*[2] another for debt and swin- dling, a third in prison for everlasting rows and delirium tremens, a chief officer — Major — of the Unteroffiziersschule[3] at Potsdam shot himself and even the *Kreuzzeitung*[4] telling the nobility that they are close upon the deluge which they expect only *après nous*! Could not be better!

Ever yours

F. Engels