---
id: MECW49-063
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, January 15, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "15 January 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "MECW vol 49"
status: raw
---

Dear Baron,

You will see from the accompanying corrected proofs,[1] that I a not inhuman and have even gone so far as to inject some soothing morphine and bromide into the introduction[2] which no doubt will have a sufficiently anodyne effect on the melancholy mood of our friend Dietz. I shall only write to Babel today.[3] I didn't mention the matter to him before since I had no desire to place him in a false position vis-à-vis Liebknecht. He would have been *honneur bound* to speak to the latter about it and Liebknecht, who has made extracts from the ms., as is evident from his speech on the programme in Halle,[4] would have raised heaven and earth to prevent its being published.

If the passage "to attend to his religious as well as his bodily needs]" cannot very well stand, delete the five words underlined and insert dots. The allusion will then gain in subtlety and still be sufficiently comprehensible. In which case it will not, I trust, give rise to misgivings.

For the rest I have obliged you and Dietz by doing everything you wanted and more, as you will see.

The Mendelssohns have arrived here from Paris. On his release the magistratate *forbade* him to leave France. The Minister, *Constant*, on the other hand, *enjoined* him to leave voluntarily, failing which he would be expelled.[5] Constant entrusted Labruyère, who is notoriously hand in glove with the police, with the task of spiriting Padiiewski away. Had Padlewski appeared before a jury, the intrigues with the Russian *monarchist*[6] in Paris could not have been concealed from the court and Padlewski might have been *acquitted*. Consequently he was an enormous embarrassment to the government and had to go. Ask La- fargue to write an article for you on the disruption by Padlewski of the Russo-French alliance.[7] Liebknecht has got hold of completely the wrong end of the stick, as he always does where foreign affairs are concerned.

The Mendelssohns arrived here without any addresses and fell into the hands of Smith Headingley and Hyndman who took them to a meeting.,[8] etc. Finally they came to my house and I gave them Ede's address; on my paying them a formal return visit for diplomatic reasons, who should come in at the door but Mr Smith Headingley. This gave me an opportunity to treat him with icy disdain in front of the Poles, which seemed to have the desired effect. They were here on Sunday[9] and today they, the Edes and Avelings are coming to dine at my house. This will doubtless frustrate the intrigues set in train in the interests of Brouse, Hyndman & Co. Pity you won't be there. We start off with oysters.

Your

F. E.