---
id: MECW49-112
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, June 16, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 June 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published in *Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky,* Prag, 1935 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Work"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 16 June 1891

Dear Baron,

Herewith the ms.— I leave it entirely to you whether you print the *whole* of it or start on p. 2 below the line where the essay proper begins. For title one could put: *On the Early History of the Family: Bachofen, McLennan, Morgan.* By F. E., or something of the sort, followed by the note: introduction to the x-th edition of the *Origin,* etc.[1]

As the ms. ended up by being highly illegible, thanks to numerous interruptions, I do *beg* you to send me a proof— and, as already mentioned, an extra copy for Rave who is all agog to get it.

The revision of the book itself is going ahead as quickly as my other correspondence permits. I'm itching to get on with it.

I almost wish that the Berliners would turn down Ede's introduction to the Lassalle[2] so that he can deal with the matter more thoroughly and with greater freedom in the *Neue Zeit.* How little is known in Germany of the *real* Lassalle is apparent from the case of Ede himself. Lassalle's letters to Marx, however innocuous they may seem to many people, as also the need to contemplate the man in the round, have thrown quite a new light on him so far as he, Ede, is concerned. But what the Berliners want more than anything else *is peace* in the party and that is hardly compatible with freedom to criticise. This is doubly disagreeable for them as they are at loggerheads with the Soldier[3] and as yet can see no way out of it. But in that case they ought to dispense with new editions of Lassalle. *Enfin,*[4] everything will doubtless get back on an even keel again.

Your

F.E.[5]