---
id: MECW49-181
title: "Letter to Edward Aveling, First half of February, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "February 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO EDWARD AVELING

IN LONDON

[Draft]

[London, first half of February 1892]

My dear Edward,

It was a perfectly understood thing that I was to revise your translation[1] in the ms. and that, having done so, I should give it the character of an authorized translation by writing a new preface to it.[2]

After the action taken by Messrs Swan Sonnenschein & Co. without consultation with either of us, and in direct contravention to the above understanding, I am bound to reconsider my position.

Your translation being made with the knowledge that I would revise it, is necessarily but a rough draft; moreover, you, as translator, would feel bound to stick to the letter of the original, when I, as the author, might deviate more or less from it and thus make the book read not as a translation but as an original work. To revise not the ms. but paged proofs in this spirit, would imply, more or less, the upsetting of the paging.

Now, as far as I can see at present, there are but two courses open to me:

Either I revise the proofs in full liberty, exactly as I would have revised your ms., regardless of the expense this may occasion. In that case our original understanding holds good, the translation is authorized by me, and I write a preface. In that case we must have four more copies of proofs at least, and revise afterwards.

Or, I am to respect the proof-sheets, as far as the paging is concerned, and merely to make verbal changes within the limits of each page. In that case I will do my best to make the translation as good as I can, but I must decline being in any way connected with it before the public, and reserve to me the right of publicly declining any responsibility for it if such would be imputed to me.

As a matter of course, the expense caused in either case would have to be borne by Messrs Swan Sonnenschein & Co. who alone have brought it about.[3]

And on all these points I must ask for their decision in writing before I stir in the matter.