---
id: MECW49-238
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, July 7, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "7 July 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. Ill, Paris, 1959 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Wor"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 7 July 1892

My dear Laura,

I went at once to Manchester[1] on the telegram of Schorlemmer's death, on Friday last week 1st July we buried him and on Saturday I returned. The last weeks of his life he remained in the same half-conscious and very oblivious, but absolutely painless state in which I had found him when there in the beginning of June, and on Monday morning 27th June[2] he expired quietly and without any struggle. A *post mortem* entirely confirmed the diagnosis of Gumpert: a carcinomatous tumour in the right lung, of the size of a small orange, sufficient, by its pressure on the vena cava and the plexus brachialis to account for the deficient action of the brain and the partial paralysis and oedema of the right arm. The large vein of that arm contained a considerable thrombus, there were distinct though small carcinomatous places in the brain, and the heart was beginning to show fatty degeneration. Under these circumstances we may congratulate ourselves that he was spared longer and perhaps acute sufferings.

Gumpert had got him in May already to make a will, he left everything to his mother. The manuscripts he left may cause some trouble. The most interesting one is on the history of chemistry, 1) Ancients, 2) Alchemy, 3) Jatrochemistry,;[3] up to the 17th century; a fragment of the 3rd part not completed, but still full of new views and discoveries. Then a lot of work on organic chemistry. But as he has *two* works in the press at the same time: 1) his own organic chemistry,[4] 2) his and Roscoe's big book[5] — it will be pretty hard to distinguish which belongs to which. One of his executors is a chemist (Siebold) but hardly knows enough about the theory of the science to distinguish. And Roscoe's red-hot after the ms., as he knows too well that *he* cannot finish the book. I have told the executors in my opinion they might let Roscoe have what belongs to the Roscoe-Schorlemmer book on binding himself to let the heirs participate in the profits of the pending volume (German and English) in the same way as Schorlemmer himself would have done. As Roscoe was elected yesterday for Manchester, he will no doubt pounce upon the executors at once, so I wrote them yesterday giving a full account of what I considered ought to be done in the matter.

A short notice I wrote in the *Vorwärts*!)[6] I send you today. Here we are in the midst of the elections.[7] They go remarkably well for us — under the circumstances. First, the immense Liberal Wave which was to carry Gladstone triumphantly to power, is all bosh. He will probably get a small majority, and it is not even certain whether there will be a majority for anybody. This will make *both* official parties dependent, for the next election, which may come *very* soon, upon the working men. Secondly the *new* working-class movement enters Parliament triumphantly. On Monday[8] Keir Hardie was elected with 1,200 majority in the East-End (West Ham)—last member a Tory[9] with 300 majority! Yesterday John Burns at Battersea with 1,600 majority — last member a bourgeois Liberal[10] with only 186 majority. And then at Middlesborough in Yorkshire J. H. Wilson, secretary of the Sailors and Firemen's Union (a *Streber*[11] but deeply engaged and mortgaged to *new* Unionism[12] beat *both* a Liberal *and* a Tory! These are the only éclatant victories in the whole election and all gained by working men: in two cases the Liberals *dared* not oppose one of their own, and in the third when they did, they were *battus à plate couture*[13] And third: wherever a working man's candidature had been well selected and prepared, it either considerably diminished the Liberal majority, so as to warn them to be more careful and not to risk losing the seat next time, or it *made* the Liberals lose the seat. Thus in 2 divisions of Glasgow, Cunninghame-Graham was beaten, *but so was his Liberal competitor.* Thus in Salford, Hall, an S. D.F.[14] man, but said to be good, had only 554 votes, but these deprived the Liberal of his seat. And thus, 3 Liberal seats lost merely because they would thrust bourgeois members upon working-class constituencies.

The election has done already what I maintained was all we had a right to expect from it: give fair and unmistakable warning to the Liberals that the *Independent Working Men's Party* was approaching, that it cast its shadow before it, and that this was to be the last general election carried on between two parties only, the Ins and the Outs. And therefore I am quite satisfied, especially so, as we shall get a parliament with which no stable government is possible.

From your silence I conclude that Bonnier is right when he writes to Tussy [:] *le journal pend toujours à un fil*[15][16] Let us hope the *fil*[17] will not snap but on the contrary grow into a rope and even a hawser.

Love from Louise. Prosperity and eloquence to M. *le député.*[18]

Ever yours

F. Engels