---
id: MECW49-202
title: "Letter to Pasquale Martignetti, April 21, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "21 April 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (German), in *La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895,* Milano, 1964 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collecte"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 21 April 1892

Dear Friend,

I am sorry that I cannot send you a German copy of the *Condition of the Working Class.*^h The book has not been in the bookshops for the past 16 years and even old, second-hand copies are offered only very rarely in dealers' catalogues and are extremely dear (30-40 marks!). I intend to bring out a new edition as soon as I have completed Volume III of Marx's *Capital.*

I am pleased to see from your translation of the English preface in the *Critica Sociale*[1] that your English has progressed by leaps and bounds. However, I wouldn't advise you to translate the book from the English text; the translation is very clumsy and full of Americanisms, not all of which I have been able to eliminate.

Once you have got to the stage of being able to translate English rapidly and without a dictionary, let's hope that Labriola, Turati or some other friend will succeed in finding literary work for you so that you may at last get away from the poverty and isolation of Benevento. If only you could leave it and go to Rome or Milan, you would undoubtedly find something fairly quickly.

My preface was not at all easy to translate, containing as it did a number of expressions for which no definition, at any rate in the sense used by me, is to be found in the dictionary.

I cannot thank you enough for the assiduity with which you translate my works, thereby rendering a great service, not only to myself, but also to international relations between Italian and German socialists. You will shortly be getting something else from me, namely the English edition of *Die Entwicklung des Sozialismus*[2] * with a long new introduction which is to appear in German in the *Neue Zeit.*[3]

From the outset Fantuzzi seemed a sham to me. You would, I think, be well-advised to ask him to return the mss and corrected proofs,[4] for who knows whether he has any intention of printing anything else.

Very sincerely yours,

F. Engels