---
id: MECW49-170
title: "Letter to Florence Kelley, January 28, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "28 January 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in: D. R. Blumberg, *Florence Kelly,* New York, 1966 Reproduced from the original Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FLORENCE KELLEY-WISCHNEWETZKY

IN NEW YORK

London, 28 January [18]92

Dear Mrs Wischnewetzky,

1) The following is an abstract of my agreement with Swan Son- nenschein and Co.

a) we (that is I in yours and Mrs Aveling's name) transfer to them the *English* copyright of the *Condition[1] * etc.;

b) that they produce it in one volume in their Social Science Se- ries;

c) that they pay us (i. e. you through me) 12'/2% o n f^un price (2s. 6d. per copy), 13 copies to be reckoned for 12;

d) the same for stereotype plates and copies sold for colonies;

e) the same on proceeds of copies sold by auction, or at reduced prices;

f) that we do not suffer from bad debts contracted by them; g) that accounts be made up as on 30th June each year and settled within 3 months;

h) that we get 12 free copies.

2) The book is now printed, out of the appendix.[2] I have made a new preface for the British reader.[3] I have suppressed the preface of the American edition. On reading the proofs I have changed a few expressions, chiefly technical terms and evident misprints or slips of the press. As soon as I get our copies I shall send you six of them.

I had another tussle with Sonnenschein, but again had the best of him. On reading proof of title page, I found that he had struck out your name on the front and put it on the back in small print! Of course I at once protested, and asked Dr Aveling to see him about this, as I could not submit to have the translator, and the party *whose simple agent I was in this matter,* thus insulted. Of course the man gave in, but it seems impossible to do business with him without having to fight such little tricks. And all this on account of that unpronounceable Russian name which he fears might injure the sale of the book, as its bearer surely cannot be expected to know English!

3) I shall account and remit proceeds to you as soon as received every year.

4) Of course this arrangement with Swan Sonnenschein and Co. puts an end to the agency, for this book, of Reeves. I have, through the kindness of Dr Aveling who lives close to Reeves' shop, after a deal of trouble managed to get an account out of him, it amounts to about £5, and also part of the money; there are £4 to be paid yet, but the fellow has caught the influenza just in time to excuse delay, so that I do not expect to get it before next week—^ *if then,* for it is easier to get the truth out of a statesman than a farthing of cash out of Reeves. This settlement therefore must be delayed til my next.

5) Sonnenschein asked me, would it be right for him to *send copies to America?* I replied certainly not, for the American edition was still on sale, and then I doubted whether you *could* give him a valid permission to do so even if you liked. But I said I would submit the matter to you, and of course in the meantime he does not send any copies.

So, this is I believe the whole budget of news I have to send you to- day, and as I am obliged to write about half a dozen long letters to- day, I must conclude.

Yours faithfully,

F. Engels