---
id: MECW49-245
title: "Letter to Pasquale Martignetti, July 25, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 July 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (German), in *La corrispondenza di Marx e Engels con italiani. 1848-1895,* Milano, 1964 Printed according to the original Published in English for the "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PASQUALE MARTIGNETTI

IN BENEVENTO

London, 25 July 1892

Dear Friend,

I have not replied to your letter of 13 May sooner because I wished to include with my reply a material token of my sympathy. At the time, however, I myself was short of funds and it is only now that I find myself in a position to send you the enclosed money-order for three pounds sterling. I know only too well that your troubles all derive from the struggle for existence and I'm only sorry that I cannot do more to make that struggle easier for you.

Meanwhile I'm glad to learn from your letter of 1 July that your health is improving and that there is no longer any fear of the neurasthenia that was threatening to take hold. I hope the improvement will continue, so that you will soon be able to look round for remunerative employment again.

I shall ask Aveling tomorrow about the *Students' Marx;* he is unlikely to raise any objections.[1]

You will have heard that in the elections[2] here we scored positive triumphs *over* both the old parties and that even where we lost we gave the Liberals a taste of our power. The movement is gaining more and more ground, thanks in particular to the resolution regarding eight hours demonstrations adopted by the Paris Congress. The First of May has *fait merveille*,[3] immeasurably more so than did the *Chassepots* at Mentana,[4] which have long since been consigned to the scrapheap.

With sincere regards,

Yours,

F. Engels