---
id: MECW49-102
title: "Letter to Leo Frankel, April 24, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 April 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published, in Hungarian, in *Népszava,* No. 130, Budapest, 3 June 1906 Translated from the Hungarian Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LEO FRANKEL

IN PARIS

London, 24 April 1891

Dear Frankel,

I owe you a reply to your letters of 27 December and the 16th of this month. As regards the first I am well aware of the disagreeable feeling that comes over one on returning to a country after many years of absence to find what was formerly a group of good friends locked together in violent fratricidal strife. Still — *à la guerre comme à la guerre*[1] That is a necessary condition of progress and there's nothing one can do about it. The moment will come when you will be able to intervene in the interests of them all, but I don't believe that that time has yet come. Brussels will throw light on many matters, if indeed Brussels ever takes place,[2] since it is threatened by the Belgians' ill-considered general strike.[3]

What has recently been happening among the various factions in connection with the 1st of May has, in my view, demonstrated once and for all that, so far as we are concerned, the first commandment must be self-restraint. Self-restraint is what I too must impose upon myself in regard to your request concerning the May Day number of the *Bataille,*[4] even if there were no other reasons for my doing so. In the first place I have not seen a single copy of the *Bataille* since June 1889 and all I know about it, and this purely from hearsay, is that it sided with the Rue Cadet in the anti-Boulangist struggle; secondly, I have for the past two months been so snowed under with requests of a similar nature that I have had to make up my mind once and for all to turn these down — one such letter is going off to Vienna today.

It's high time Volume III of *Capital* came out. Before I set to work on it I have got to get some new editions ready and *this I cannot possibly refuse to do.* But so long as Volume III remains unfinished I shall take nothing on and, what's more, shall actually have to cut down on much of my correspondence.

With best wishes from myself and also from Louise Kautsky.

Your

F. Engels