---
id: MECW49-192
title: "Letter to August Bebel, March 16, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 March 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published, in Russian, in *Bolshevik,* No. 22, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 16 March 1892

Dear August,

Today I have a request, namely that you send me the stenographic report of the session at which our chaps spoke about Alsace-Lorraine and Singer apparently made a statement on the same subject on behalf of the parliamentary group. 445 I'm sure to be questioned about it and should therefore like to be in possession of the *precise* facts.

Over here the usual struggle[1] has begun again in regard to May Day, but so far the outlook is favourable. What I am about to tell you *must not appear in the* *Vorwärts*, for Gilles will interpret and manipulate it in his own way for Hyndman's benefit — i.e. in order to sing the praises of the Independents 333 and malign the parliamentary group and, since the struggle has still to be decided, anything that might be published could be used *against* us.

Well, the original LEGAL 8 HOURS COMMITTEE, 200 presided over by Aveling, and the TRADES COUNCIL 196 under Shipton (presently allied with Hyndman and the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 29) tackled the matter almost simultaneously. The 8 HOURS COMMITTEE invited the TRADES COUNCIL to act in concert with them, as happened last year, but was rejected with contumely. At the same time it approached the METROPOLITAN RADICAL FEDERATION (comprising more than 50 radically 'labour' and partly socialist clubs), 430 whereupon the latter was approached by the TRADES COUNCIL. In the meantime Aveling had played the same trick on the TRADES COUNCIL as they had played on him 2 years before 446 and secured first right to the Park.[2] Having assured itself of the Park, the 8 HOURS COMMITTEE actually made a further approach to the TRADES COUNCIL but was again rejected with contumely. Immediately afterwards, however, the METROPOLITAN RADICAL FEDERATION, which on several occasions had also been treated by the TRADES COUNCIL in a high-handed way (last year the TRADES COUNCIL admitted only TRADES UNION people, not club speakers, to the platforms they had been allotted) resolved that, whatever happened, it should join forces with the 8 HOURS COMMITTEE, but that there should be one more attempt at reconciliation with the TRADES COUNCIL. The 8 HOURS COMMITTEE met on Sunday[3] when it was agreed with the METROPOLITAN RADICAL FEDERATION that the latter should make this attempt, after which a decision would be taken on further action. That is how matters stand. Up till now the 8 HOURS COMMITTEE has been in a vastly superior position. It has the Park, the GASWORKERS, a whole number of small EAST END UNIONS and the Radical Clubs — in short, a number at least twice as large as that which supports the TRADES COUNCIL and Hyndman's FEDERATION. For the moment the latter is keeping as quiet as a mouse and letting the TRADES COUNCIL do its work for it. Provided there are no blunders or indiscretions, the TRADES COUNCIL will either have to back down or, as was the case 2 years ago, play second fiddle at the demonstration, and an ill-tempered fiddle at that.

I have now read Mehring's 'Lessing-Legende' in the *Neue Zeit* and derived much pleasure from it. It is a really excellent work. There is much that I should have accounted for differently or toned down a bit, but all in all he has hit the nail on the head. It is truly a pleasure to see that the materialist view of history, which for the past 20 years has — as a rule — had to pay the price of being used as vainglorious rhetoric in the writings of our younger party members, is at last beginning to be put to the use for which it was originally intended, i.e. as a guide for the student of history. Kautsky and Ede have produced some very nice stuff in this line but Mehring has made a much closer study of his special subject, namely Prussia's small segment of German history, and generally takes a less blinkered view; above all he expresses himself more positively and precisely. I hope the work will be published on its own as soon as it has finished appearing in the *Neue Zeit.* Never, to my knowledge, has the citadel of the Prussian legend been besieged so well and so forthrightly: for Lessing read old Fritz.[4] And it is vitally necessary to demolish the Prussian legend before Prussia is able to vanish into Germany. As regards the *preconditions* for Prussia east of the Elbe in German as well as in European and world history, I should sometimes have expressed myself differently but these are things which in fact Mehring merely touched upon.

But now I must go and eat so that the Witch can get on with her Witch's Latin. As to the EAST END business,[5] you mustn't let it worry you too much; I don't think that anything dangerous is being planned.

Warm regards to Mrs Julie[6] and yourself.

Your

F.E.