---
id: MECW49-030
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, October 19, 1890"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "19 October 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time First published, in German, in *Einheit,* Nr. 11, Berlin, 1955 Reproduced from the original Published in English in Marx-Engel"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 19 October 1890

My dear Löhr,

At last! This week I have been, if not busy, at all events 'occupied' and 'engaged' over head and ears. I have sorted about 4 cubic feet of old letters of Mohr's (that is to say addressed mostly to him) of the period 1836-64. All higgledy-piggledy in a big basket, which perhaps you may remember. Dusting, straightening, sorting — it took more than a week to put them into rough order. During all that time my room upset, covered with paperasses[1] in various degrees of order and disorder, so that I could neither go out nor do any other kind of work. That was No. 1. Then came the congresses[2] with — not work, but loss of time for me by callers, etc. And finally, Nim has been quite out of sorts all this week, went to bed on her own accord on Thursday morning and actually sent for the Doctor,— who however told her there was no reason for her to stick in bed, she might sit up at least a few hours which she does. He cannot as yet exactly make out what it is, there are symptoms (jaundice) of liver complaint, she has no appe- tite and is weak. However since last night she is better and in better spirits, and I hope will be well in a few days.

I hope Paul has got rid of his intimate friend inside. If he has not, it's his own fault, a dose of felix mas or cousso will soon put an end to that nuisance. It will poison the brute and do him no harm.

Our congresses have come off gloriously and when we compare them with the Possibilists,[3] they come out in still bolder relief. *That* nui- sance now will soon put a stop to itself. Only I hope that our friends will give them every inch of rope they may require and not interfere in the least by approaches or otherwise. *Il faut qu'ils cuisent dans leur propre jus}*[4] Any attempt on our side to meddle with them would only arrest for a time the process of disintegration and *pourriture*.[5] The masses are sure to come round to us by and by. And the longer we al- low the leaders to kill each other, the less of them shall we have to take over on the day of reunion. If Liebknecht had not been in such a hurry with regard to the Lassalleans coming over to us, he would not have had to take over Hasselmann and others who had to be kicked out six months afterwards.[6] And now in France, as then in Germany, the whole lot of the leaders are rotten to the core.

To my great surprise and relief in last *Justice* Hyndman declares for Brousse! What a piece of good luck. I was beginning to be afraid I might get into a position where Hyndman would have to be taken on again as at least passively a friend, whereas I like him 10,000 times better as an enemy.

Paul now *may* be right: the Possibilists *may* abstain again from their own Congress.[7] The date and place appear to have been fixed at Halle: Brussels, 16 August 1891. This is all I know. To-morrow I shall hear it all from Tussy who left Halle yesterday, her return ticket to Cologne expiring on that day.[8]

I am glad Fischer has been put on the *Parteivorstand*.)[9] You have seen him here. He is very intelligent, very active, revolutionary, *absolute- ly anti-philistine,* and more international in his ways and manners than most Germans. Tussy writes that after the Lille Congress,[10] the German Reichstag men, a great portion of them, at least, made a rather philistine impression upon her. I fully expected that. As our M. P. s are not paid, we cannot get always the best men, but must ac- cept from those in a relatively bourgeois position the *least bad.* There- fore our masses are far better than the *fraction.* The latter may congrat- ulate themselves that they had such asses and shady fellows (many of them probably *mouchards*[11] for an opposition.[12] If they should rebel against Bebel, Singer and Fischer, they will have to be acted against — but I am sure Bebel will always be strong enough to cow them.

Paul *est bien naïf avec ses questions sur Bebel et le 'Gil Blas'. Il con- naît Bebel et il connaît le 'Gil Blas'; est-ce qu'il ne se connaîtrait plus soi-même?*[13] At any rate I shall send the *Gil Bias* *fortement souligné*[14] to Bebel and tell him to disown. Such impudent lying exceeds all measure, even for *Gil Bias.*[15]

Tussy is quite in love with the Lille delegates, and indeed they seem to have been a regular élite, and shown the very qualities which it has been the fashion of late in France to cry down because the Germans showed them to a higher degree, though up to 1870 it had been the regular thing to claim discipline, *esprit d'organisation et action combinée* as *des qualités tout ce qu'il y a de plus françaises*.[16] I was very much inter- ested in Paul's account of these delegates[17] and shall take care that it gets into the English and German Press. The great advantage of the French is that they are bred and born in a revolutionary medium. Both English and Germans lack that advantage and are moreover brought up in the religion of the bourgeoisie — protestantism. That gives to their habits, manners and customs a *spiessbiirgerlichen An- strich*[18] which they have to shake off by going abroad, especially to France. Look at the redaction of the Lille and the Halle resolutions!

That is the great progress: we cannot now do without any one of the three. Only the Belgians and the Swiss we could very well spare.

Love from Nim and yours affectionately

F.E.

As Paul has said so much in the *Neue Zeit*[19] about the fleets construct- ed by Mohr for you girls when you were children, I enclose him the, probably, last specimen extant of Mohr's naval architecture.