---
id: MECW49-118
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, July 7, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "7 July 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. Ill, Paris, 1959 Reproduced from the original Published in English for the first time"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

[London,] 7 July 1891

My dear Laura,

That's bad for poor Paul, at least it looks bad at present.[1] Anyhow, he is not in prison yet. There is *cassation,* though that is one chance out of ten only in his favour. There *must* be some row in the *Chambre* about this infamous verdict, and I hope Millerand and Co. will not fail to make that row. I think it admirable policy of Paul to at once assume the offensive, revisit the battlefield of the North, and make himself as formidable to the government as he can. That is what the French always see better and clearer than our Germans, that, in order to make up for a reverse, you must attack at another point, but always attack, never show the white feather, never give way.

At all events his seat in the *Chambre* seems now pretty safe, and that would bring him out of prison if the election took place while he was in. *Le Nord nous appartient maintenant*[2] What fools these governments are! To think they can put such a movement as ours down by repression. But with all his insolence M. Constans shows vacillation; the 'bus strike 276 showed him in quite a different light; there is no telling what he may not do, if he finds the effect of the verdict to be contrary to his expectations.

*Rave est à ravir*[3] I pity anyone who has to correct that man. What a work of Sisyphus it must have been for you! Anyhow it may give you an opening for translations with his publisher, and then your labour may bear fruit.

By the bye, the correct French expression for **Schutzergebung**—the technical, juridical word, is *commendation.*

I am finishing the revision of the *Ursprung* for the 4th edition. There will be considerable and important additions; especially a new introduction[4] (proof sent to Rave, the text probably in the next *Neue Zeit*) and then in the chapter on the family. I think you will like them, my inspiring genius to a great extent has been Louise who is full of clear, transparent and original views on the subject. She wishes to be most kindly remembered to you and Paul.

Ever yours,

F. Engels