---
id: MECW49-072
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, February 6, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 February 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, Paris Printed according to the original Translated from the French Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volu"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 6 February 1891

My dear Lafargue,

This from a letter I have had from Fischer on the subject of the alleged intervention of the Germans in favour of 3 May:

'You are perfectly right. None of us here would be so insane as to seek to impose anything at all on the parties of other countries. The parliamentary faction's resolution was addressed *exclusively* to the German working man. It arose simply out of recognition of the fact that in the present situation, and given the severe political and economic tension now prevailing, any celebration on Friday 1 May would be a sheer impossibility. Unfortunately there are only too many who, despite themselves, will abstain from work on 1 May. Our capitalists are furious over the turn of political events in Germany.[1] They would like nothing better than to find occasion to mount a general attack on us. The crisis that has recently gripped the iron, textile and building industries has presented them with that opportunity, thereby placing them in a position to deliver a general onslaught which at this moment we should be unable to fend off. Consider the case of the Hamburg cigar workers. That will show you who holds the trump cards today.[2] They represent our *corps d'élite,* not a BLACKLEG amongst them, and yet the battle was lost weeks ago. Ultimately it is the small manufacturers who will have to foot part of the bill. But it is costing our working men a hundred thousand marks from their own funds — not counting the contributions from other towns which are sending money to support the strike. Accordingly 1 May is out of the question, financially speaking.'

That, I think, ought to satisfy you. Nor should you be surprised if, as I have already pointed out to you, the English follow the Germans' example. Tussy believes it highly probable. You Frenchmen have a passion for uniformity, which is all very well, provided the cost is not too high. But to preserve uniformity by ruining our prospects in Germany and putting paid to any real success in England would be pedantic indeed.

Yours ever,

F.E.