---
id: MECW49-274
title: "Letter to August Bebel, September 26, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "26 September 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 26 September 1892

Dear August,

Louise will already have told you something about Kugelmann. At first, during the 60s, he was on very friendly terms with Marx and did a great deal towards breaking the newspapers' conspiracy of silence over *Capital, Volume I.* It was also he who persuaded Marx to go to Karlsbad,[1] which did him a lot of good, but after they had been there for a while there was a final parting of the ways. Since Marx's death he has written to me several times, but I have tried to keep my distance, not being convinced of his reliability. At all events he has more than one foot in more than one camp.

As regards the copies of *Herr Vogt,* I have written and told him that he must first let me know how many he has got. There are all sorts of people wanting it. I believe that not even Tussy or Laura have got a copy. You, too, will be given preference if at all possible.

Arndt is a student who used to be in Geneva, and then went to Spain where he frequented our people in Madrid before coming to this country. While here he was taken under Julius'[2] wing and he would occasionaly come and see us. Then he suddenly went to Paris. He never said a word to us about his intention to write for the *Vorwärts*— presumably this was arranged by Julius. I gave him a card for Laura but have never heard whether he presented himself; I shall ask her. Laura would have referred him to Vaillant and, since the latter was in Paris and Lafargue was nearly always away, this would account for the consideration currently being shown to the Blanquists and their allies, the Allemanists.[3] Can you get hold of Arndt's address for me? After the Congress,[4] and particularly when the daily comes out, Lafargue will be spending more time in Paris and the man will have to be referred to him and Guesde direct.

I rather think I remember seeing Meyer[5] in St Louis, but there are so many people of that name. I trust that Kugelmann, who is forever bragging about his connections, will be able to find something out.

Pieper was at one time tutor to the Rothschilds in this country and is now a grammar school teacher in Hanover. Marx once — in 1867, I think — ran into him in the street, by which time he had become a bloated philistine.

I completely agree that you should go on with the *annual* party conference. If only for constitutional reasons you, as an Executive, should adhere to it, otherwise what a fine pretext it would provide for malcontents. And it's also important that once a year the party itself should be able to express itself as a body; this is generally applicable but doubly so just now — vis-à-vis both the 'Independents'[6] and Vollmar.

It is a great pity that you people should have been in such a hurry to put what I told you about Hyndman[7] into the paper.[8] Let me therefore expressly point out once and for all that in future anything I pass on to you in private letters is intended solely for your information and, where necessary — subject to the usual reservations — for the correction and prevention of inaccuracies or misconceptions in the *Vorwärts;* not for *immediate publication,* however, except when this is *expressly stated.* Otherwise I should have to keep my mouth shut about everything I could not actually substantiate, or else, in most cases, run the risk of having to betray my sources, thus causing these to dry up for the future.

Basically the information as such is quite *definitely correct,* as every number of *Justice* goes to show; gone are the attacks on individuals in this country or on the Continent, nor is anything left of the Hyndmanian spirit. But it's very possible that my information may have contained *formal* errors and that the mere *threat* of a resolution was enough to make Hyndman resign, etc. The only cause for regret is first, that this business will mean this and other sources on the doings of the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION will be closed to us, secondly, that Hyndman's position has been improved thereby and, thirdly, that any further attempt to put a stop to this can only improve it still more.

In *Justice* there's a piece by Hyndman expressing the expectation that you people would *not* print his letter, and to that extent he has made an ass of himself. I shall try and get hold of a copy for you.

I have written and told Kugelmann that, so far as I was competent to say, you were authorised to read the letters from Marx to him. Also that he would be getting *The Knight of the Noble Consciousness.*[9]

I have today received proofs of your article from K. Kautsky with queries about two passages.[10]

I. There was nothing in the *Daily News* about the adoption in Glasgow of a resolution that delegates should after all be sent to Zurich, nor had Aveling heard anything of the kind, otherwise he's have said so. He was intending to come here today but hasn't turned up. Louise say that on her way here she had seen something of that nature in the *Daily Telegraph.* In the circumstances I advised K. Kautsky to insert the words: *if the relevant newspaper report is true.* That covers you completely.

II. 'The Independent Labour Party now coming into being — whose supporters assembled for the first time after the end of the Glasgow Congress to constitute themselves—', etc., etc.

I advised K. Kautsky at all costs to delete the words between dashes: '—whose... constitute themselves—'. The Independent Labour Party now coming into being over here is still very far from constituting itself, nor is it desirable that it should yet attempt to do so. It is not yet mature enough. The INDEPENDENT LABOUR PARTY, whose adherents more or less constituted themselves a party in Glasgow under Keir Hardie's chairmanship, is the sect founded by Autolycus (Joseph Burgess) of the *Workman's Times,* a sect which so far boasts 2,000 members and competes with the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION in recruiting socialistically minded workers. At present it is no more *the* Independent Labour Party than is the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION, nor is it either better or worse than the latter. What will come of it remains to be seen, but on no account should *we* proclaim it as a matter of course to be *the* one and only genuine Independent Labour Party, otherwise we might burn our fingers badly.

Since his election Keir Hardie has been pushing himself to the fore and putting on airs in a way that is both ludicrous and discreditable. Success has gone to his head and he will have to sow his wild oats for a while. He is evidently intent on pushing Burns into the background; the latter is behaving with great fortitude and restraint (he asked leave to call on me in order to consult me about the attitude he should adopt). I think it will all even itself out in the end — Keir Hardie is better than he makes himself out to be, but you should by no means conclude as a matter of course that someting is commendable because *he* happens to be taking part in it.

Otherwise I find your article quite unexceptionable — composed, dignified and emphatic.

At Marseilles the TRADES UNIONS Congress *{Congrès des syndicats)*[11] passed a resolution which I had put to Lafargue,[12] namely *that they should not take part in the international congress convoked by the TRADES UNIONS but should invite the latter to attend the Zurich Congress.* This isn't the exact wording which I have yet to receive. Liebknecht will probably send it you as he had just turned up when Lafargue was in the act of writing. The Congress of the Workers' Party will adopt a similar resolution. I drew Lafargue's attention to the fact that the TRADES UNIONS do not recognise the validity of Labour Party congresses and resolutions while according respect of a very different order to those of the trades unions. If you in Germany could get the trades unions to adopt resolutions along the same lines, this could not fail to make an impact over here; it's something that should certainly not be neglected.

You might send about 12 copies of your article to *us* for distribution to the papers over here. For their people very seldom understand foreign languages, and whether they would so much as look at it is a complete toss-up. To get anything into the press over here one must employ different methods. If, for instance, Aveling were to take *the finished article* to the *Pall Mall,*[13] he would probably get it in that same evening we should send copies to the other papers so that they would *all* be served at the same time and there might still be a possibility of its getting a mention in one paper or another. But once *one* paper has discussed any such subject, none of the others will subsequently take it up — such is the rule over here. That is why we, who are here on the spot, must be able to determine the moment of distribution. On the other hand you could certainly send copies, specially designated *as coming from you,* to the French press; it might possibly have some pull over there, particularly since in France we haven't got a single daily in which we are able to publish anything. You could send it to *L'Eclair* (the paper most likely to take it), *Le Figaro, Le Temps, Le Matin, La Justice, L'Intransigeant, Le Parti Ouvrier* (Possibilist) and *Le Parti Socialiste* (49, rue de Rivoli, Blanquist — weekly).

Please let me know whether or not the *Workman's Times* is still being sent you by the editorial department. Here it is being said that all complimentary copies for countries abroad have been cancelled. If this is true, I shall send it to you instead of to Fischer who can read it at your house or after you have done with it.

Well, I should have liked to write a word or two to your wife,[14] but it is already past 9 p. m. and, contrary to doctor's orders, I have already spent over-long writing by lamplight. I have also had to write to Victor[15] and to Karl Kautsky which has taken me all day, so please ask her to excuse me. But she will be getting a letter all to herself from me. Till then, please give her my warm regards.

Your

*General*

I have just heard from Louise that you have not been getting an official copy of the *Workman's Times* for some while past. So that is one thing settled.