---
id: MECW49-187
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, March 5, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 March 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published abridged in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 5 March 1892

Dear Sorge,

Have received your letters of 15, 22 and 29 January and postcards of 2, 4 and 13 February. Also the newspapers re Anna.[1] The latter has evidently succumbed to that fashionable complaint, megalomania. It's strange; these sort of people, the Hartmanns *et al,* are fit for *one* deed — GOOD, BAD OR INDIFFERENT — and, once that's done, are good for nowt else,[2] as Schorlemmer would say.

Though I haven't alas had time to read your last article in the *Neue Zeit*[3] I must get round to doing so since it's only with your help that I can follow developments in America without going astray.

I am terribly overburdened with all kinds of tasks and tiresome odds and ends. You ought to see the mass of German, French, Italian, Spanish, Polish, Russian, Danish, American, English and, now and again, Romanian newspapers I get and must at any rate glance at if I am to keep *au courant* with the movement. Not to mention genuine tasks which swallow up the rest of my time. And the correspondence! I've got backlog enough to last me a week. And then I'm supposed to complete Volume III[4] It's appalling. But it will be managed some- how. Only you people must be patient if I sometimes allow my corres- pondence to lapse.

In France things are going very well. Lafargue is using his expense allowance and his free railway pass to travel all over the place, from Lille to Toulouse, agitating and this with brilliant success. All the other socialist factions have been pushed into the background by ours and even in Paris the Possibilists are continuing to beat a retreat, thanks to their internal squabbles and to vigorous action on the part of our own people. They again have in mind a daily journal as party organ, and this would now stand a better chance.[5] It's capital that Constans should have been sacked from the Ministry of the Interior; the chap was determined to provoke fusillades, by violence, and we can do without them. Since our May Day demonstration coincides with the municipal elections throughout France,[6] shooting is a lux- ury no minister could permit himself unless, like Constans, he was banking on a nine days' wonder.

Here the bickering continues as before, but nevertheless the cause is making headway in true Anglo-Saxon fashion, slowly but surely. Everything always subsides into small individual battles which can- not be assessed until actually resolved. At the moment these concern the May Day celebrations. On the one side our people, on the other, in opposition to us, the TRADES COUNCIL (the stuffier TRADES UNIONS) and the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION; the two enemies of yesteryear have been forced to club together against us, which is in itself a vic- tory. *We* are in possession of Hyde Park and POSSESSION is NINE POINTS OF THE LAW. How things will turn out remains to be seen. On our side we shall probably have the GASWORKERS, a number of the smaller un- ions and the RADICAL CLUBS (almost wholly working class)—what happens next must remain to be seen.

And now for Germany. Things are going so swimmingly there that we couldn't wish for anything better, although we shall no doubt ex- perience some pretty hard knocks in the near future. From the outset Little Willie[7] has been a prime example of a 'last of the line' with a singular aptitude for ruining the dynasty and monarchy. But now his madness has taken on an acute form and his megalomania is such that he can neither sleep nor hold his tongue. As luck would have it, the *regis voluntas* which, at the drop of a hat, would become *suprema lex,*[8] is directed against us one day and the Liberals the next, and now he has actually discovered that it's the Liberals, whose progeny we are, that are the source of all evil — he's been taught as much by his clerical friends. And now he's prosecuting the *Kölnische Leitung* for lèse-majesté[9] and will not rest content until he has hounded your tame German philistine into the opposition. What more could we ask? A month ago, when Stumm's speech was heard in the Reichs- tag,[10] it was still possible to envisage the re-introduction of the Anti- Socialist Law but that is no longer the case, for William is more in- censed by the opposition of the bourgeoisie to his bill for the clericali- sation of primary schools[11] than by all the Social-Democrats put to- gether, and would sooner leave us alone than make any concessions to the other fellows. In both chambers it is, in fact, from the bourgeois parties that he encounters most opposition, not from our 35 members in the Reichstag; in the Prussian chamber we have no seats at all. Nevertheless, we, too, may run into some heavy weather — yet what could be better than for the Crown to place itself in an impossible po- sition vis-à-vis the middle classes and the workers at one and the same time? The ministers are all second-rate or third-rate men, Caprivi is a staunch lout but unequal to his task, nor does Miquel grow any the wiser for his perpetual cheese-paring. In short, at this rate a crisis may be in the offing. In Prussia and in the Prusso-German Empire people cannot as in Bavaria afford to go on for years putting up with a demented monarch[12] and I shouldn't be surprised if, some time soon, they didn't erect a special madhouse for Little Willie. And then there'd be a Regency, which is exactly what we've been needing.

As regards Russia and *la haute politique*[13] I have nothing to add to my article[14] in the *Neue Zeit.*

Warm regards from Aveling, who happens to be here just now — Tussy is off agitating in Plymouth. Louise will enclose a short note. Warm regards to your wife,[15] and look after yourselves.

Your

F.E.