---
id: MECW49-116
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, June 29, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 June 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49, pp. 209-212"
status: raw
---

Dear Kautsky,

I have come down here to take refuge with Pumps for a few days, having been inundated with an intolerable amount of work. No sooner had I become happily engrossed in group marriage than I was landed with the party programme, which *had* to be attended to.[1] I mean at first to try rewriting the preamble in rather more succinct form but want of time prevented my doing so, besides which I thought it more important to point out the shortcomings, some avoidable, others not, of the political part, as this would provide me with an opportunity to lash out at the conciliatory opportunism of the *Vorwärts* and the clean-devout-joyous-free 'ingrowing' of the old canker 'into socialist society'. I have since heard of your proposal that there should be a new preamble; so much the better.

The party is going to print Lassalle's letters to Marx and myself, annotated by me 260 (thus precluding all censorship by the party). I can attend to this in the autumn, alongside Volume III. (This *between ourselves*.)

I have taken refuge here in order to finish off part of my correspondence; on Thursday I go home, when work on group marriage will be resumed. I was getting along so nicely – confound these interruptions!

*Poverty of Philosophy –* the position is that Dietz is to buy himself out for 450 marks, whereupon negotiations will be restricted to the four of us, so all is well and we shall be able to sort things out all right. But there can be no question of you two refusing to take *any* remuneration for the 2nd edition.

Dietz's plan for a volume of Marx's minor works won't do. Long ago Liebknecht cherished a pet project of this sort; it was to be put into effect by his latest protégé, Paul Ernst, who was also to publish other things of Marx's and, **in fact**, to be sent to me for a few months so that I could help him in this. The idea was for the thing to be published by the Berlin bookseller under the party's imprint – i.e. an edition of Marx alongside an edition of Lassalle. I turned this down categorically, which means that I can do no less where Dietz is concerned. I have *Permitted* the party to publish a few minor things of Marx's in pamphlet form and as individual items, without notes or preface. Nor can I go any further than that. I cannot allow them to steal a march on me by bringing out in this piecemeal fashion the complete edition to whose ultimate publication I am committed.

Nor, for that matter, can I now contemplate a new edition of the *Condition*, etc., not, at any rate, until Volume III is completed. I am perfectly prepared to negotiate this with Dietz in due course, but the chaps have simply got to realise that I can take on absolutely nothing more until Volume III has gone to press. While it is in printing, arrangements can be made for something else. But until then I shall resist *all incitements* and pet projects, whether they emanate from Dietz or anyone else. After all, the chaps ought to have sense enough to exempt me till then from this sort of thing since it could only involve me in useless, time-consuming correspondence. As soon as I have finished revising the *Origin* I shall set to work on Volume III and then, come rain or shine, I'll carry on regardless.

Vollmar's speech with its quite unnecessary concessions to the present Establishment and its still more unnecessary, and, what's more, unauthorised assurances that Social-Democrats would play their part if the Fatherland were attacked – i.e. would *help defend* the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine -has caused unmitigated glee amongst our opponents over here and in France. If it is allowed to pass, our chaps will have to pay very dearly for it in Brussels. The Possibilists and the Hyndmen are quarrying it for notes, after their usual fashion, nor can we over here do anything about it in the absence of an authentic statement denying Vollmar the right to speak in the name of the party. Now, as Hyndman's man of straw, Bax has recently written on the subject in *Justice*; I haven't seen it yet.

The meeting of women in labour in Hyde Park has caused considerable merriment here and in London – the English version even more than the German because of the play on words in **demanding a reduction of the hours of labour** which, more specifically, can mean travail: **a woman in labour**.

Ravé's address is Faubourg Rochereuil, Poitiers, France.

Pumps now lives down here; Percy has taken on an agency for his brothers. Their little house, The Firs, is in Brading Road, exactly one English mile outside the town. It's small but pretty and has a garden with vegetables and fruit. Old Harney spent four weeks at Ventnor where he had a recurrence of gout and rheumatism. We fetched him over here on Saturday; he will probably travel back with me on Thursday and return to his headquarters in Richmond. He is terribly lame and out of sorts.

Schorlemmer will probably soon be with us. As you know, he's a very uncommunicative correspondent. While over here, Sam Moore has suffered from African malarial fever but is now better again. In August or September he will be returning to the Niger. In his heart of hearts, I believe, he yearns after the beautiful climatedespite the bouts of fever which recur with menstrual regularity.

How could you possibly imagine I cared a rap about whether or not I'm given pride of place in the *Neue Zeit*? Simply suit yourself.

Many regards from everyone here.

Yours truly,
F.E.