---
id: MECW49-176
title: "Letter to Conrad Schmidt, February 4, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 February 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "Printed according to the original Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO CONRAD SCHMIDT

IN ZURICH

London, 4 February 1892

Dear Schmidt,

On the strength of your letter of 12 December we drank a toast on the 19th of the same month to you and your young wife and on the following day, Sunday, after we had had a meal with the Avelings, this was solemnly affirmed by us all in a fine 1868 port. I trust you are now comfortably settled in Zurich and have found that living with another is preferable to living alone.

Very many thanks for your anti-Wolf article.[1] However it also compelled me to read Wolfs opus[2] which I had quietly laid aside in my bookcase against a rainy day. Since the chap takes the view that the sole purpose of the German language is to conceal the emptiness of his mind, the perusal of this rubbish has been something of a job, though one soon discovers the void that lies behind it. You have stated the main points quite correctly and lucidly and were perfectly right to ignore the unessentials, all of which were put in, of course, simply for the purpose of getting the reader so snarled up that he overlooks the chief flaw. That the man has an aptitude for economic folly amounting to genius I already knew, having read an article of his in the *Neue Freie Presse* in which he seeks to put the Viennese bourgeois into an even worse state of confusion that they are in already. But this time he has exceeded even my expectations.

Let us reduce his argument to mathematical terms: C,, C2, two aggregate capitals whose respective variable components = v1; v2, and whose respective *quantities* of surplus value = s, and s2. Given an equal rate of profit for both (profit and surplus value being provisionally taken to be equal), it may therefore be said that

C 1:C 2 = s 1:s 2, therefore — = —.

S[
S2

On this assumption we must now establish the necessary rate of surplus value, i. e. we multiply one side of the equation by v. / v1 = 1 and the other by v2 / v2 = 1; thus

CjVj. = C2V2 = C\
Xi =
S i î x ^

SlV,
S2V2
\ *1*
*S'**1*******
V2
S 2'

If we bring the respective factors over to the other side of the equation, thereby inverting the fraction, we have

V^-1
S i
v_-?
Si
V^i
*\~s->*
Si
ST
— x—= — x —
or
—:— = —:—,
\*1*
v2
v2
*v'**t*******
\*t* v2
Vi v2

or, in order to produce Wolfs equal rate of profit, the rates of surplus value must be in proportion to the respective aggregate capitals divided by their respective variable components. If they are not, Wolfs equal rate of profit falls to the ground. But that they 1. *can* be and 2. *always must* be — this was the economic fact that it was up to Mr Wolf to prove. Instead he gives us a deduction in which the point to be proved *appears as an assumption.* For the equation of the rate of surplus value as set forth is simply another form of the equation of the equal rate of profit.

Example: C, = 100, v, = 40, s, = 10
C 2 = 100, v2 = 10, s 2 = 10

Cj
C 2
S[
s 2

100 100
10 10
,.,
.
.
— • — = —:—
which is correct.
40
10
40 10

Now it really seems to me that you go a bit too far when you claim absolute uniformity of rates of surplus value for large-scale production as a whole. The economic levers which impose uniformity upon the rate of profit are, I think, much stronger and more rapid in their effect than those whose pressure equalises the rates of surplus value. However the *tendency* is there and the differences are negligible in practice. All economic laws are, in the end, merely the expression of mutually incompatible tendencies which gradually assert themselves.

Mr. J. Wolf is in for a pleasant surprise when the turn of the preface to Volume III[3] comes round.

I'm extraordinarily glad that you have made such an encouraging start as a lecturer and trust it will so continue. It will give particular pleasure to Mr Wolf—serve him right.

It's certainly a very good thing that some of those student gentlemen of yours who have looked askance at the transactions of the party should now be resuming their studies. The more they learn, the more tolerant they will be towards people who hold really responsible positions and try to fill them conscientiously, and in time they will also probably realise that, if an important goal is to be attained and the immense army necessary to its attainment kept together, they must concentrate on the main issue and not allow themselves to be led astray by irrelevant squabbles. They may also discover that the 'education', by which they set so much store vis-à-vis the working man, still leaves a great deal to be desired and that the working man already possesses instinctively, 'immediately' *à la* Hegel, what they could only din into themselves at the cost of much toil. But the shameful business of Jungen at Erfurt was truly deplorable[4] and their newspaper,[5] from what I have seen of it, is no more than a feeble imitation of the anarchist autonomy over here.

If you become 'bogged down' in Hegel, do not be discouraged; six months later you will discover firm stepping-stones in that self-same bog and be able to get across it without trouble. In Hegel the coherent sequence of stages in the development of a notion is part of the *system,* of what is transient, and I consider that this is where he is at his weakest — if also at his wittiest for at every difficult point he has recourse to a witticism: positive and negative fall to the *ground* and hence lead on to the category **ground***)[6] *(Encyklopädie*[7]. Obviously this would require a different rendering for each language. Try translating the sequence in the *Lehre vom Wesen* into another language and you'll find the transitions for the most part impossible. Many regards from*

Yours,

F. Engels