---
id: MECW49-270
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, September 17, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "17 September 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, Paris, 1959 Printed according to the original Translated from the French Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 17 September 1892

My dear Lafargue,

Your opinion that we should take advantage of the opportunity of teaching the old English TRADES UNIONS a lesson is also shared by Bebel. If Liebknecht goes to Marseilles,[1] you will have a good chance of coming to an understanding with him. At the same time you might ask him why the *Vorwärts* is packed with news about the doings and sayings of the Broussists,^3 Allemanists 53 and Blanquists, yet is vir- tually silent on the subject of our own people. However they are say- ing in Berlin that the cholera is rampant in Marseilles and that might put a stop to his trip.

Since the English TRADES UNIONS recognise only *bona fide* WORKING MEN and then only those who are organised in trade unions, it is of the ut- most importance that not only the Workers' Party Congress, but also, and in particular, the French trade unions,[2] who will be holding their congress a few days before ours, should take a firm stand on the presumption of the English in seeking to ignore the *existing* movement on the Continent so as to start another one under their own leader- ship and based on their own views. French trade unionists will as-

suredly protest against what was said in Glasgow 5 4 0 about them- selves and other continental working men.

(Woods M.P.)

'that the organisations on the Continent OF EUROPE WERK VERY INEFFECTIVE, BUT HE FELT SURE THAT IF THE POWERFUL ORGANISATION [\ ENGLAND WOULD *ONLY EXTEND THE HAND OV FELLOWSHIP AND SYMPATHY* AND BROTHERHOOD' (what, nothing more?!) TO THEIR FRIENDS ON THE CONTINENT, THEY COULD MINIMISE THE DIFFICUL- TIES' ETC.!

Foster OF Durham, MINER:

'HE WAS STRUCK WITH THE REMARKS OF M R. WOODS, THAT THEIR EFFORTS IN THIS COUNTRY WERE TO A CERTAIN EXTENT NEUTRALISED BY THEIR FELLOW-WORKMEN IN OTHER COUNTRIES WHO WERE NOT ORGANISED SO WELL AS THOSE IN THIS COUNTRY; *THEIR SOCIAL POSITION WAS NOT EQUAL TO OURS'* (!!!)...IF THEY COULD GET THEIR FEL- LOW-WORKMEN O N T H E C O N T I N E N T *TO SHOW THE SAME CONSENSUS OF OPINION* *AS* *THOSE IN THIS COUNTRY* WHEN THEY MADE UP THEIR MIND TO A PARTICULAR ACTION

(he is referring to the 8 Hours and you know how strongly the English opposed it when the Continent was already unanimous those selfsame Englishmen who, one after another, are now giving tongue!)

'THEY WOULD THEN KNOW THAT THE POWER OF LABOUR COULD ACHIEVE THE OBJECT' ETC.

Holmes, Burnley (cotton weaver, newly converted to the 8 Hours and anxious to prove that this change of front hasn't turned him into a socialist cannibal):

'WERE THERE SOME ADVANCED, OR AS THEY CALLED THEM, SOCIALIST MOVEMENTS ON THE CONTINENT, THA'I THEY WANTED TO DRAG THEM INTO (at Zurich).[3] HE ASKED THOSE GENTLEMEN IF THEY WANTED TO GO TO THAT CONGRESS IN THE NAME OF THIS BODY TO ADVOCATE MANY OF THE WILD SCHEMES WHICH THEY KNEW WERE GOING ON ON THE CONTINENT?'

Conner, London:

'THOUGH THERE WERE TWO INTERNATIONAL CONGRESSES ALREADY ARRANGED FOR (ZURICH AND CHICAGO 57 ') NEITHER OF THEM *WERE ARRANGED BY, OR UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF, THE TRADES CONGRESS* (!!)'

There. That ought to be enough in the way of insults to quicken the pulse of your French trade unionists.

I repeat: *So far as the moral effect it would create here in England is concerned,* a *Trades Union Congress* resolution rejecting the divisive ten- dency inherent in the Glasgow resolution would be far more impor- tant than one emanating from the *Socialist Congress.* So do the best you can. Tussy has sent a newspaper report to Delecluze.

Give the French comrades my kind regards and keep up the good work, as at Lille.[4] Tussy says that the Working Men's Congress there was the most BUSINESS LIKE one she has ever attended.

Yours ever,