---
id: MECW49-142
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, October 25-26, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 October 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published in *Aus der Frühzeil des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky,* Prag, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 25 October 1891

Dear K.K.,

My congratulations on the acceptance of your draft programme at Erfurt and on the deletion of 'one reactionary mass'.[1] I have not yet had time to compare your draft in detail with the programme as finally accepted.

I have proposed to Dietz that the fee for the 2nd edition of *The Poverty of Philosophy* be divided equally between all 5 concerned — 240 M for the 3 heirs and 160 M for the 2 translators, assuming 400 M to be the total, or pro rata if not. I hope you will agree to this so that we can get the business settled once and for all. The heirs are not entitled to the *whole* fee for this edition.

I have also asked Dietz to hand you on my behalf a copy of the new edition[2] of the *Origin, etc.,* a bound copy, that is.

Everything went off really splendidly at Erfurt.[3] Auer's and Fischer's speeches in particular caused us a great deal of merriment. But those two thoroughly deserved a chance to vent their wrath on the 'opposition'. Pit a Bavarian against a Berliner and there'll be damned little left of the Berliner at the finish. But the behaviour of these gentry, like that of Vollmar, shows how greatly that little crew had overestimated their own power. Retreats such as these are quite unheard of. But it could not fail to make an impact abroad, and over *here* it has meant a resounding defeat for Hyndman who first took Gilles publicly under his wing and obviously believed his boasts about the collapse of the German party — he would now like to disassociate himself from the scoundrel if he could. Incidentally, Gilles has been elevated in *Figaro* to the status of great man!

You may, if you wish, put an announcement in the *Neue Zeit* to the effect that the following will be coming out in Swan Sonnenschein's & Co.'s SOCIAL SERIES: 1. my *Condition of the Working-Class*[4] in Wischneweizky's translation, 2. my *Entwicklung des Sozialismus*[5] translated by Aveling, 3. Ede's introduction to Lassalle translated by Tussy.[6]

Louise has suggested to me that it might be in the interest of the *Neue Zeit* to send a copy regularly to the editor of *The Review of Reviews,* W. T. Stead, Mowbray House, Norfolk Street, Strand, London, W. C. The thing has a sale of over 100,000 copies and prints extracts from reviews from all over the world together with the contents (titles of articles) of all of them, no less than 23 of these are from Germany, including the *Deutsche Revue, Ueber Land und Meer, Gartenlaube, Nord und Süd, Preußische Jahrbücher,* etc., etc. From the *Economic Journal* our draft programme's demands. Since Stead is a thoroughly mad sort of chap, albeit a brilliant businessman, it may well be of benefit to us and, on occasion, prove enormously effective if you were to send him copies — for whenever there's a chance of creating a sensation, he ruthlessly seizes on it, irrespective of the source. The thing would also be enormously useful to you people, costs only 6d. a month and contains a tremendous amount. It would save your reading *any other* English revue.

Now I must go out for a spot o' fresh air; the Avelings and Edes[7] will be arriving for luncheon shortly.

Your

F.E.

Monday, 26 October

I am sending you a copy of *The Review of Reviews* in which Stead butters up Mother Besant with the intention of instructing her in Christianity.[8] He obviously wants to win fame as the man who led her back to Jesus. There's one way to do that. For Mother Besant invariably shares the religion of the man who *downs* her.— Ede and Tussy agree to my proposal about the distribution of the fee.

Lafargue obtained 5,005 votes in Lille, the two Opportunists 4,174 together and the Radical, Roche, 2,272; the latter stepped down in favour of Lafargue. Hence, if an Opportunist is to get in, 3,000 abstaining Monarchists will have to *support* him in the second ballot. A most satisfactory position, therefore.[9]