---
id: MECW49-155
title: "Letter to August Bebel, December 1, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "1 December 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVIII, Moscow, 1940 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

London, 1 December 1891

Dear August,

At last, after three exuberant days, my birthday mood may perhaps have subsided sufficiently for me to write a moderately rational letter again. First, then, the Lafargue affair has been settled. I have today heard from Laura—Lafargue has gone to Lyons,[1] having only been in Paris for a couple of hours on Saturday to attend to his scrutiny—who says:

'Paul authorises me to say, 1. that he confirms his letter to you' (see below); 2. 'that the meeting at which he spoke in Bordeaux was *private**,—a closed meeting for members of the Workers' Party—'that no reporters had been admitted and no official record exists; 3. *****the incriminating statements are the invention of a reporter brodant sur le texte d'un article publié par Ranc*[2] * (embroidering on the text of an article by Ranc); 4. 'the words used by Paul were as follows: "If I insisted upon the war being continued, this was because the information at my disposal led me to believe that Germany was not in a position to hold out for very much longer." '**

She adds:

**There was no question of plans obtained by Germans or through their agency;* in general Paul *declares* that, *throughout the war, he received no communications of any kind from Germany.* And Paul also says that he *subscribes to your demands,* and not only subscribes to them but *challenges any refutation of his above statement.**

(Le Perreux, 28 November; only reached me today.)

In his letter to me (Lyons, 26 November), Lafargue says that the purport of his speech had been such and such, that in 1870 the International in all countries had considered it its duty to prevent the crushing of the French Republic by Bismarck's troops, and that while the other Internationals had fought under Garibaldi, the Germans had protested against the continuation of the war and the rape of Alsace-Lorraine.

My demands to which he subscribes were for the repudiation, without reservation or qualification, of the statements ascribed to him and of their purport. These you now have and may *use as you think fit.*

So that's *one* weight off my mind, I'm glad to say. Thanks to the colossal stupidity of our enemies, they have lost this opportunity for a scandal, and now it is gone for ever. Should anything be brought up now, you will be forearmed and your assailants will look foolish in the extreme. But while the uncertainty lasted we over here were in a muck sweat, I can tell you, for fear that some reptile[3] or other should get his fangs into the thing before we knew what answer to make and *how* to give him the lie. But what idiots they are! As Tussy said only last Sunday, if *we* had got hold of some information like that about our enemies, what wouldn't we have done with it!

I missed the incident at Potsdam involving William II; what was it? The affair would certainly seem to be assuming a growing pace, and every such straw in the wind is of interest. According to the papers over here, your Emperor intends to relinquish all the honorary colonelships he holds in the Russian army because of the impolite way in which Alexander travelled across his domains.[4] I should say that the Russians are trying to inveigle him into untimely escapades so that *he* may appear to be a disturber of the peace whilst *they,* who are pretty well unassailable, can afford to play for the highest stakes and allow him to purchase peace at the price of further concessions. That they really intend war seems to me impossible. The failure of the French loan—instead of £20 million a bare £12; famine of unprecedented dimensions and intensity; the winter crops virtually destroyed by lack of seed and unfavourable weather; the wholesale death or slaughter of cattle and horses in the most fertile regions for lack of fodder, so that agriculture will be paralysed for years to come—all these are things which, in a semi-barbarous country like Russia, will deprive the army of any prospect of successful action. But despite all this, the Russians are not deterred from behaving politically as though they were deliberately heading for war; this they can permit themselves because of their strategic position and their expertise in betraying their friends. Of course, their little plan may always go awry—hence mobilisation and troop concentrations on a massive scale which, if things go off peacefully, can also serve as an instrument of diplomatic pressure.

Wonderful. France and Russia are confronting the Triple Alliance,[5] based 'on the existing status quo', with a Dual Alliance which has 'a far loftier principle, namely the maintenance of the treaties!' Or so the papers say. Thus France, wishing to *break* the Treaty of Frankfurt, declares itself desirous of supporting it with the help of Russia, while Russia, which customarily breaks all treaties, enters into alliance with this self-same France because of the latter's steadfast demeanour. How stupid men such as *these* must consider the public to whom they address themselves.

Your budget speech was brilliant[6] —to judge by the *Vorwärts.* Do let us have the stenographic report. The allusion to *our* soldiers could not have been more apt. Why keep one's mouth shut about things our enemies know as well as we do?

The fact that Carl Hirsch isn't coming is not, to my mind, a disaster.[7] I didn't like to say anything once matters had been settled, but over here I at once remarked that it wouldn't work out. Hirsch is not only pig-headed but also embittered without reason, believing as he does that he was unfairly excluded from the editorship of the *Sozialdemokrat;* in fact, I believe that his resentment was directed more against Marx and myself than against you people.[8] For, as you will remember, what he wanted was that *we* should *press* him to accept, which had never ever crossed our minds. At all events he thereupon ceased to play any active role and has since accumulated such a mass of grievances and crotchets that, if for no other reason, it might, I think, be better were he to void his costiveness elsewhere, after which he will gradually return to a more normal frame of mind and thus again become capable of doing something worthwhile. But I feel sure that Liebknecht and he would not have endured six weeks of each other's company without falling out. Schoenlank, too, has certain bees in his bonnet; so far as I can judge he hasn't nearly enough guts to put up the necessary resistance and will soon chalk up so many sins of omission as to make his chief editor his chief *in real earnest.* Well, we shall have to wait and see how things go—they can't get very much worse.

You are always comparing the situation in Germany with that of 1787-88; it is far more like that of 1847 in France and the scandals which brought about the downfall of Louis Philippe: Teste, the venal minister, the duc de Praslin, who murdered his wife, an equerry to the king who was caught cheating at cards in the Tuileries, or Fould who paid bribes in high places to get into the Légion D'Honneur, etc., etc. What's odd is the way people in Germany carry on about a bank crisis; for the few tin-pot firms that have gone to the wall are quite outside international trade as such—money brokers to civil servants, officers, landed aristocracy, petty bourgeoisie—to everyone in fact except wholesalers. If Anhalt & Wagener, Diskonto-Kommandit, Deutsche Bank, etc., were to put up their shutters, then it might be permissible to speak of a bank crisis. But even so, things aren't so dusty and, if the cloak falls, the Duke will soon come tumbling after.[9]

What you tell me about the kind of 'comrades' who are now presenting themselves is most interesting and also significant so far as the situation is concerned.[10] They have noticed that we are, to use a reptilian expression, becoming a 'factor' in the state and, since the Jews have more intelligence than the other bourgeois, they are the first to notice this—especially under the impulsion of anti-Semitism—and the first to come over to us. We can only be glad of the fact but, precisely *because* these chaps are brighter and have, as it were, been thrown back on and schooled in careerism by centuries of oppression, one has to be rather more on the qui vive.

Please will you convey my best thanks to the parliamentary group for their kind telegram of the 28th.[11] As soon as I get the photographs I shall endeavour to pay back in kind all the testimonies of friendship I have received.

Ede tells me you had suggested that he should spend more time at the Society.[12] I am firmly convinced that every minute he spends there would not only be completely wasted but would also discredit the party. He would have to consort with Gilles there and that is completely out of the question. But what he ought to do is frequent the English, get to know the chaps personally and enlighten them about things in Germany by conversing with them; as it is, he sits at home and forms an opinion of local affairs from the accounts he reads in *one* or at most *two* newspapers, there being no coffee houses or reading-rooms in his district.

Finally, let me assure you—as expressly requested—that Louise has executed her commission with a dignity worthy of a president of the Reichstag—at the very least; she had no opportunity for making bad jokes since I invariably forestalled her with some of my own. In other respects we were, however, exceedingly merry during the time in question, not least on account of your ostensible admirer[13] who, on the last page, revealed himself to be a 'Junger'[14] desirous of placing you on the shelf. The fellow is really priceless, with his ultra-High German.

Warm regards to Mrs Julie[15] and yourself from Louise and

Your

F.E.