---
id: MECW49-197
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, April 4, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 April 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, Paris, 1959 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Work"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 4 April 1892

My dear Laura,

Today but two words to ask you to look after the *Eclair.*— On Friday[1] morning all of a sudden Emile Massard came down upon me with a demand for an interview for that iridescent paper. As he promised to submit the ms. to my correction, and as I thought to be thereby able to put a flea in the ear of the Parisian *gogo,*[2] I consented. Yesterday I looked over the ms. and *almost entirely recast it.* Would you be good enough to send me about 4-6 copies of the paper as soon as it appears? If correct I shall want them for various regions, if incorrect, I shall at once protest against the breach of faith.[3]

Anyhow this new experience with the eternal interviewing nuisance will help me to refuse in future, as I always have to do the real work (from 11 to 3 yesterday, instead of being out this warm weather) and even then it's not what I want and does not bring out my ideas. Damn the lot of them.

I was in Ryde for a week,[4] has done me good. Pumps and the children are well, Percy has had influenza, pneumonia, pleurisy, inflamed throat, etc., one after the other and is only just recovering.

I am busy with an infernal preface[5] for the never-to-be-satisfied Swan Sonnenschein and Co. and that, as it will be long, will take me all week. As soon as finished you get a long letter.

*Salut* to the travelling parliamentarian[6] who is not only a peripatetic grass widower but also a grasshopper, and love from Louise and yours

everlasting old

General

Next week we expect Bebel here unless stopped by ill health — he seems a deal out of sorts by overwork and overexcitement.