---
id: MECW49-253
title: "Letter to August Bebel, August 14, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "14 August 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Vo"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN BERLIN

Ryde, 14 August 1892

The Firs, Brading Road

Dear August,

I share your hope that by the beginning of September I shall have so far recovered as to be able to travel at least as far as Berlin. *Should* this be the case, I shall without fail pay a flying visit to Berlin — my sole destination in fact, for by then the Engelskirchen folk will have dispersed to the four winds.

The only question is whether it is going to be possible. And of that I cannot as yet give you any idea. I know from experience that in such cases 3 or 4 weeks' rest is absolutely essential if I am to recover my mobility, and any premature exertion or excessive exercise, however slight, will set me back by a week or a fortnight. But unfortunately one cannot tell until it's too late whether the exertion is premature or the exercise excessive.

On top of that I am, after all, 5 or 6 years older than I was at the time of the last bout, and have undeniably allowed more alcohol to pass through the inner man this year than I normally do in three. So I shall have to resign myself to a somewhat longer cure, even if the inflammatory symptoms have not resulted in any organic changes in the shape of adhesions or lesions or scarring.

At all events it will not be until very late in the day that I shall be able to tell from observations what the position is. You must keep me properly informed of the addresses at which my letters and, if needs be, telegrams, can reach you, especially in the case of Vienna, and how long you propose to stay there, so that Louise doesn't leave for London at the same time as I for Berlin.

Last Monday[1] and Tuesday I was in London where I saw the Avelings and put my house in order. Thus the cure was interrupted until Wednesday. Now I am lying absolutely still and, of course, feel correspondingly better. I hope in a week's time to be able with impunity to allow myself at least a *modicum* of exercise. I shall let you have a bulletin as soon as there is anything to report.

Needless to say, I shall now have to observe 'sobriety and moderation' in regard to alcohol. I had indeed been surprised at my continued ability to tolerate the stuff so well, and had grown overconfident as a result. Well, we must hope that the consequences do not persist too long. I must revert to my former principle of abstaining for a fortnight or a month every so often. Not that I regard abstaining from drink as any more of a hardship than refraining from smoking, provided there is good reason for it.

I have not had an answer from Louise to the letter I wrote to her a week ago today. The Sunday postal arrangements over here are abominable.

One good piece of news: Mr Seidel's intrigues, aimed at preventing the accursed Marxists from having any say in the preparations for the Zurich Congress,[2] would seem definitely to have misfired.

Greulich wrote to Tussy on behalf of the Zurich Committee requesting her to draft a letter of invitation to the English TRADES UNION Congress[3] and also to do their English translations. The letter arrived when the Avelings were on the point of leaving for Norway and Tussy, of course, immediately drafted the invitation, and generally placed herself at the committee's disposal; she sent me Greulich's letter when she was actually on board the steamer.

And now for another: a period of slack trade and the manufacturers' threats to knock 10 per cent off wages has suddenly cured the Lancashire cotton operatives of their enthusiasm for 10 hours and opened their eyes to the advantages of the 8 hour day. Even the leaders are already said to have switched horses. Thus the 8 hour day has triumphed in England. The resistance of those factory hands who enjoyed the protection of the 10 hour day was the principal weapon in the bourgeois arsenal. They'll lose it, come the September congress.[4]

K. Kautsky did not make use of the enclosed passages from the Avelings' article in the Neue Zeit.[5] When he wrote, he said this had had to be done for *technical* reasons; may be, but again it may have had something to do with Ede's comical respect for the FABIANS and Bax's (he's in Zurich) interest in the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION.[6]

At all events, you'll find the passages interesting and they form an essential part of the overall picture.

You might get the *Vorwärts* to print the following questions:

1. Is it true that the 'Independents' in London, i.e. those who were thrown out of the Communist Workers' Educational Society,[7] have founded a club and rented Grafton Hall, a large building in Fitzroy Square, for the purpose?

2. That to help raise the considerable sum required for this, Mr Baginski, who earns at most £3 a week, made a contribution of £500 sterling = 10,000 marks?

3. That Mr Hochgürtel, likewise a working man, contributed another £500 and that, to the question as to where he had got the money, he returned the strange reply that he had divorced his wife, and thus obtained *her* money?

4. That the brewer who supplies beer to the club advanced another £1,200?

5. If all this be true, where did this money come from and who provided the brewer with the collateral without which no one would be so stupid as to advance so large a sum?

Warm regards to your wife[8] and children,

Your

F.E.

The Roshers send their kindest regards.