---
id: MECW49-055
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, December 20, 1890"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "20 December 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "First published abridged in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrick Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

[London,] 20 December 1890

Dear Sorge,

Have had your letters up to the 9th of this month. Use my letters as you think fit.[1] I am glad that you consulted Schlüter about the question of the fee^b and that all is now settled. As things go in *Germany,* what they offer is *very* respectable. Schoenlank, by the way, who wrote and told you this, is a most depraved fellow who in fact does not hesitate to seize on any and every opportunity to extort money from the party. Of this he again gave proof at the Halle Congress.

I am greatly overworked, hence just a postcard today. I have taken on Mr Brentano who must now be disabled 'good and proper'.[2]

Louise Kautsky has decided to stay with me *for good.* I am, of course, absolutely delighted and deeply grateful to the sweet child. She is giving up a great deal for my sake, but luckily I am in a position to offer her in return much that would not be available to her in Vienna. Besides keeping house for me, she does a fair amount of secretarial work—just what I needed. So as you will see, I cannot for the present accept your kind invitation to move to Hoboken 108; I am engaged in renewing my lease for another three years.^2

I hope that, by the time this arrives, your wife will have completely recovered. Schorlemmer will again be unable to visit us this Christmas because of his persistent aural catarrh; otherwise he might go deaf. So more anon. A Happy Christmas to you.

Your old friend,

F. E.