---
id: MECW49-151
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, November 14, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "14 November 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published abridged in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Jon. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 14 November 1891

Dear Sorge,

A line or two in great haste before the last post goes. You will have heard by cablegram about Lafargue's victory.[1] It was brought about by M. Constans, who is as stupidly cunning and doltish as Bismarck, if not more so. 1. In a scandalously biassed trial he blamed Lafargue for the government's fusillade at Fourmies and got him sentenced to a year's imprisonment. 2. Having thus made Lafargue enormously popular in the Département du Nord, and after the latter had been put up for the first seat to become vacant at Lille, Constans kept him in prison, contrary to the *precedent established* 22 years earlier *by the Empire itself,* instead of releasing him for the period of the election; 3. when, in the first ballot, Lafargue polled 5.005 votes, i. e. only 780 fewer than were needed for an absolute majority, Constans still did not release him, despite being severely rapped over the knuckles by the Chamber. Since the Radical candidate,[2] Roche, who had polled 2,274 votes, then proceeded to step down in favour of Lafargue, Lafargue's victory was assured.

But the best thing about it is that that idiot Constans further succeeded in making Lafargue's election into an *événement* thereby seriously endangering his own position. For on 31 October, when a demand for Lafargue's release was made in the Chamber by Millerand, the proposal to go over to the order of the day was carried by 240 votes against the Radicals' 160. *But only because 170 Monarchists did not vote.* This was the *first time the Radicals had voted against the government since the Boulangiade,* thus demonstrating that the government can be toppled at any moment by the combined votes of the Radicals and Monarchists. And when, *after Lafargue's election,* a motion for his release was again tabled on 9 November, it was only the prospect of those combined votes that forced the government to abandon its intention of opposing the motion.

But now that the Cabinet is torn by dissension and Freycinet would rather obtain his majority *through* the Radicals, whereas Constans would rather do so through the Monarchists and *against the Radicals,* now that Constans has incurred the odium of the workers by his actions since May Day and his friend Rouvier is the most notorious and corrupt man in the Ministry, while Carnot, for his part, finds Constans intolerable because the latter is trying to succeed him, Carnot, as President of the Republic, all these parliamentary fluctuations assume significance. For the recurrence of ministerial instability in France is another guarantee of peace, since the Tsar would be chary of going to war arm-in-arm with a French government that is liable to topple any day.

Again, these symptoms are significant so far as France's domestic situation is concerned. A large number of Radicals — Millerand, Hovelacque, Moreau, etc.— realise that they simply can't do without the workers and that the government's duplicity in introducing into the Chamber bills ostensibly favourable to labour while ensuring that these are thrown out by the Senate, is something that just won't do. But if Lafargue should now get in and the small 7 or 8 strong socialist group — all of them small fry and incapable of any initiative — thus obtain a leader, things might soon begin to change. Only on condition, however, that Paul himself doesn't allow his eighth or twelfth part of negro blood to run away with him.

In Germany everything is going swimmingly. In Munich 344 itself Vollmar suffered an even more decisive defeat than at Erfurt.[3] The opposition is virtually non-existent, and will soon be completely under the wing of the police. Any newspaper reports to the contrary, particularly such as are cabled to you, are false—I have seen some prime examples of this.

What will happen about the *Vorwärts* I cannot say. It has improved, but Hirsch isn't going to join it. Not that I really regard this as a misfortune.

Regards to your wife.[4]

Your

F.E.