---
id: MECW49-263
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, September 5, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 September 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in *Aus der Frühzeil des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky,* Prag, 1935 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Work"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

[Ryde, 5 September 1892]

Dear Baron,

I forgot to reply to you about Bonnier the day before yesterday.[1]

If you look at the reports on England and Germany over the signature 'B' or Bernard in the *Socialiste,* it will enable you to judge to what extent you can make use of him. Bonnier is a sterling fellow, but his German studies have somewhat spoiled the Frenchman in him, something I have observed more than once in his fellow countrymen. He lives in a world of books and will find it difficult accurately to weigh the facts of the living movement one against the other. Moreover he resides at Oxford, far removed from all the activity, besides which he has an unshakeable faith in Guesde. Guesde's illusions and optimism are in many respects of great value within the movement itself, in much the same way as are Liebknecht's; neither is prone to despair. But these qualities are hardly suited to the reporting of current activities. However Bonnier, with his native intelligence, is bound gradually to gain in refinement — not that I have seen much of him of late. If the others on the daily are finding more than enough to do, you really haven't much alternative — provided that Bonnier, too, is not fully occupied in that quarter. Regards from Pumps and Percy.

Your

F.E.

I return to London tomorrow.[2]