---
id: MECW49-257
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, August 22, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 August 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, Paris, 1959 Reproduced from the original in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

Ryde, 22 August 1892

The Firs, Brading Road

My dear Laura,

I had hoped to hear from you how the preparations for the great event are progressing, as the day of October 1 is drawing near; and especially would it interest me to learn that the fr. 25,000 — the guarantee-fund that business is meant — have been paid in to the Credit Lyonnais. But perhaps I shall now hear in a few days, the sacramental date of the 20 *Août*[1] with its 250,000 *en espèces et tout l'outillage*[2] having passed.[3]

I have had an attack of my old complaint which from 1883 to 1887 laid me up lame from time to time, and had left me pretty well undisturbed for five years. Unfortunately at the wrong time it returned. I was to have left about 10 days ago, gone to Zürich to see the Beusts, thence with Bebel who is at St Gallen, to Stuttgart, Munich, Vienna, where we were to take up Louise and go to Berlin, and thence return to London. All this *ist ins Wasser gefallen*.[4] Bebel will have to do the Vienna trip alone, but wants me to come at least to Berlin if possible. Now as I am gradually mending, it is not quite impossible that I should be in a condition to undertake that bit of a journey. But so far I cannot tell, I want at the very least another fortnight's rest. Fortunately the fine weather allows me to spend all my lame time in the garden, and the splendid air here does me a deal of good.

Tussy, just before she was off for Norway, had a letter from Greulich, in the name of the Zürich Congress Committee, asking her to send them a draft invitation, for the International Congress, to the Glasgow Trades Union Congress, and to do all their English translation work. I suppose you know that some months ago Seidel intrigued to have this job given to one who was not connected with the damned Marxists. Louise in Berlin on her road to Vienna told Bebel, and Bebel at once wrote to Zürich, and this is the result.

I have to shut up. It's dinner-time, and the cloth must be laid where I write. Immediately after dinner the mail-boxes are cleared (3 p. m.). So *gehab dich wohl*![5] When shall we see you again here in England? I hope this autumn even if you cannot bring the *député-directeur politique*[6] with you.

Pumps, Percy and the little ones send their love.

Ever yours,

F. Engels

Hope you had my last with Louise Kautsky's Vienna address.