---
id: MECW49-135
title: "Letter to Paul Lafargue, October 13, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 October 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published in *F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, Correspondance,* t. III, Paris, 1959 Printed according to the original Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Marx-Enge"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 13 October 1891

My dear Lafargue,

Why didn't you ask me for the cheque as soon as you needed it? Why expose Laura to such humiliations when you know that one word from you — or from her — would be enough to put a stop to them?

That dear man Constans would seem to be intent on making you deputy for Lille whatever the cost — so much the better, let's hope he pulls it off. If all you have for opponent is an Opportunist, you should have every chance of success. It is of the utmost importance that we should have you in the Chamber—the other socialist deputies don't seem to be UP TO SNUFF, they're feeble, feeble, feeble!

Constans will undoubtedly do his best to upset your plans — but in that case he will be working for you, just as Bismarck in Germany worked for us. For in my country it's not the socialists who work for the King of Prussia;[1] rather it's the King of Prussia^b who works for the socialists. And it may well be that the fury aroused in Constans' breast by the boos and catcalls at Marseilles will prove a powerful level in getting you elected. 'Above all, don't be too zealous,'[2] Mr Constans!!

I have a long letter to write to Bebel;[3] today on the subject of the Erfurt Congress[4] there are several very important questions to dis- cuss. That's why I must cut this letter short. Keep smiling, try always to poke fun at your opponents, PUT YOUR TRUST IN THE HISTORICAL LUCK OF THE PARTY, AND KEEP YOUR POWDER DRY.

F.E.

Likewise from Pumps and the children who are still here. The little girl[5] needs a steel brace for her back (she is growing too fast) and the man who is making it keeps dragging his feet from one day to the next.