---
id: MECW49-186
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, March 5, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 March 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in *Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky,* Prague, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 5 March 1892

Dear Baron,

Your ms.[1] goes off by *registered* mail today. I have only been able to read the first 16 pages. If I were you I should omit the better part of this introduction. The reasons why a programme should have a commentary, etc., etc., in short, all those reflections of yours about *why* the pamphlet was written, only serve to weaken the impact and deter the reader from persevering. You must plunge straight into it — you could have no better justification. I cannot give an opinion of the way the rest, the major part, is arranged. So overwhelmed am I by work of all kinds that I don't know whether I'm coming or going. Nothing but trifles, but quite scandalously time-consuming. I long to have time for Volume III[2] and every day am invariably robbed of it. Well, we shall get round to it some time or other.

Ten copies of *Neue Zeit* containing my article[3] received with thanks. Simply amend the name Hodgskin and the figure 1824 in the next edition, and include a note saying that in the original these read such and such, *obviously a slip of the pen or printer's error.*[4]

Menger is a jackass and will so remain. His critique of bourgeois law[5] is throughout nothing but a vindication of the 'police state' as opposed to the 'constitutional state'. True, the law, especially bourgeois law, is stricter and more rigorous than police despotism which may sometimes appear humane precisely because it is despotic. If I had the time, I should soon put paid to this empty talk which is possible only in backward countries such as Germany and Austria.

I am glad you are agreeable to the Luther idea.[6] There's no rush. Cunow's letter returned with thanks. I look forward to seeing the ideas he has worked out about class.[7] He has made some very nice discoveries about the Peruvian gens. He had sent me the stuff and I thanked him for it.

You will also be getting the Peruvian community system — I have just looked at it.

I don't think you are in any danger for the time being. So changeable and multifarious are the cravings in Berlin that none could really be satisfied; now all at once it's the liberal bourgeois who's the *bête noire.* Liberalism is at the root of all socialism, so if one is to act *radically* one has got to smash liberalism, whereupon socialism will automatically wither away. For the present we may observe this exceptionally cunning manoeuvre with quiet amusement. Once the liberal philistines have been driven wild — and they are, it seems, really being whipped into a fury willy-nilly — then there'll be no more false alarms so far as we are concerned. Apart from the fact that in Germany there are also rulers to whom this wind from Berlin provides the not unwelcome opportunity of currying favour at little expense and thus extracting capital for particularism and reserved rights.[8]

When the street rioting began in Berlin[9] I was somewhat concerned lest it result in the ardently desired fusillade, but when the rowdies cheered young William,[10] thereby placating him, I knew that all was well — but just let the *Kölner Leitung* be locked up along with Peus,[11] and we may well see some fun.

So in my view, in so far as there is any danger, it is primarily confined to Prussia, and the greater it becomes there, the better off you people in the small states will be.

Now I have got to write to Sorge—the American mail goes today— so FAREWELL. Aveling, who has just come in, sends his best wishes. Regards from one household to the other.

Your

F.E.