---
id: MECW49-152
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, November 21, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "21 November 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published abridged in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 21 November 1891

Dear Sorge,

Have had your letter of 6 and postcard of 8 November. When Adler and Bebel came over here from Brussels, the former promised me that he would send you the Vienna *Arbeiter-Zeitung* regularly, and the Viennese stand by their word. Now that the Austrian movement is growing in importance, I am having to keep copies of the paper myself.

*Der arme Teufel* caused much merriment over here. Adler took the first Adolfinade with him and I sent the second to Bebel.

It goes without saying that you should publish Marx's letters to yourself if you want to, without asking me or anyone else. As soon as your articles on the American labour movement are complete, you ought to bring them out in booklet form[1] — in Dietz's Internationale Bibliothek, say — so that they can be kept permanently together.

If you like, I could do what is necessary to set the ball rolling with Dietz. He will, of course, have to pay for the things again.

Bakunin's biography[2] received with thanks — haven't looked at it yet.

In one of my letters[3] I asked you *not* to send me any middle-class American reviews — I can get all the *good* ones over here (from Mudie's) if there's anything in them — and Tussy keeps her eyes open. On the other hand I was about to add a request when I was interrupted and thus sent off the letter *as it stood;* namely, that you send me from time to time individual numbers of some women's rights organ — any old one. Louise looks at such stuff from time to time in order to keep herself — and hence also me — more or less informed about that racket.

In Berlin and other cities more victories in the municipal elections — in Berlin the number of votes has *trebled.*[4]

The *Jungen*[5] have formed an association[6] and are bringing out a rag, *Der Sozialist* — impertinent and silly. Nothing but tittle-tattle and lies. True, they would be easier to combat if Liebknecht didn't make so many blunders and edit the *Vorwärts* so deplorably.

So Mrs Schlüter intends to come back after all! Just as we thought. In this country, too, we have scored sundry little victories in the municipal elections; in West Ham (it's called WEST BECAUSE EAST OF THE EAST END), Will Thorne, secretary of the Gasworkers Union and a really splendid chap, was elected, etc., etc.

Warm regards to your wife[7] and yourself from

Your

F. Engels