---
id: MECW49-137
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, October 13, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 October 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, Paris, 1959 Reproduced from the original Published in English for the first time"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 13 October 1891

My dear Laura,

Herewith the cheque £20 — to turn your landlady out of your domicile.

Now as to your *Almanack.*[1] I am writing you an article but as it will have a practical turn toward the end of it, I can hardly send it off, or give it its final shape, until a short time before publication. Therefore I *must* know when your *Almanach* is to appear. Otherwise the thing may turn stale, or even be completely upset by events. It won't be more than 2 or 3 pages, 4 at outside, so there will be no necessity to send it early — as far as *technical* matters are in question. But you will see that it is impossible to write *un article d'actualité* unless it be printed and published at once. So please let me know and I shall gladly do my best to oblige *nos amis de là-bas.*[2]

Thanks for the papers. That *Action de Lyon*[3] seems a splendid specimen of the present state of fusion and confusion amongst the French socialists, out of the midst of which arises, erect, unavoidable, *zudringlich, unausstehlich*,[4] the everlasting Adrien Veber, basking in his own conceit, in which he is hardly second to his worthy master Benoît Malon.[5] How does this new harmony of all the disharmonies work? I see in the *Secrétariat du travail*[6] there are all sorts, Possibilists A and B, aside of our people and a lot of others, and so far they seem to have respected each other's carcasses without coming to blows. I cannot imagine how it is done and what may be the upshot of it.

How much was the fine inflicted on Paul? I cannot find it in the *Socialiste* and have not any other paper ready at hand — and what chances have you to evade it?

Love from Louise, Pumps, the children and your old ever thirsty (going to have a bear with Pumps)

F. Engels