---
id: MECW49-097
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, April 7, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "7 April 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published in *Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky,* Prag, 1935 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Work"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 7 April 1891

Dear Kautsky,

Your letter has just arrived. Pity you weren't able to induce Schmidt^2 ' 4 to join you there; he'd have been just the man for you. Meissner writes to say that he has *only now* sent off the review copies of the 4th edition[1] *along with* the *Anti-Brentano*^b 96 and that both have gone to the *Neue Zeit.* So you can begin *forthwith;* at all events you should have both of them before your article is printed.[2] If not, write to O. Meissner, *citing me* and this communication.

An Alsatian, Henri Rave, presently in jug, who translated Bebel's *La Femme*[3] and is now translating my *Origin*[4] under Laura Lafargue's supervision, wants to know whether your *Thomas Morus*[5] is worth translating. I have recommended the book to him but at the same time written to say that I would ask you to send him a copy so he can make up his own mind about it. Address: H. Rave, *détenu à la prison,* Poitiers (Vienne, France).

Just now the French are fully occupied with their own affairs, namely May Day and the attendant negotiations with the Possibilists of both Allemanist[6] and Broussist^3 persuasion — in which our own chaps are acting as arbitrators!! — etc., and also with their *Socialiste,* which explains why Paul Lafargue has done no work for the *Neue Zeit.* 2 ' 6 Odd that the French should be adopting exactly the same policy towards the crumbling ranks of the Possibilists as that recommended by Marx in his accompanying letter of 1875 for adoption towards the Lassalleans.[7] And, indeed, they have done so successfully up till now — a success that will doubtless be sealed by the Brussels Congress. 135

Many regards.

Your

F.E.