---
id: MECW49-260
title: "Letter to August Bebel, August 25, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 August 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO AUGUST BEBEL

IN LUNZ

Ryde, 25 August 1892

Dear August,

Your letter dated 23, St Gallen, arrived this morning. I know perfectly well that the Prussians cannot do me any serious harm, but better safe than sorry and one never knows what chicanery those gents may not get up to. Some bright busybody of a policeman might at any time take it into his head to make things awkward for me under some bogus pretext or other and, perhaps, improve the shining hour by getting hold of certain letters from Miquel to Marx.[1] And, as you know, the Prussians make it a rule not to humiliate in public any official who commits a blunder, but at most quietly to haul him over the coals after having publicly whitewashed what he has done.

By the by, my projected journey is once more very much in the air. During the last day or two I have once or twice ambled along to the nearest post office some three hundred paces from the house and this trial of strength has again resulted in a total if temporary inability to walk more than a few steps, extraordinary sensitivity to pressure from the bandage in the inguinal region, etc.— which means that I'm laid up again. Today there is some improvement as a result of my having rested, but whether, in the 13 days between now and the 7th, things will have improved enough for me to be able to undertake the trip is, I think, very questionable. Well, we shall see.

No further news from Louise. On the other hand, I was delighted to hear from Dietz that, at your request, he had paid the second instalment of the fee for the *Condition,*[2] namely 500 M., to Victor. At the beginning of September there is going to be something else of mine in the *Neue Zeit,*[3] the fee for which will be paid to Victor, and I have likewise instructed Dietz to pay him *all* balances accruing to me with his firm. I have *got* to finish the third volume of *Capital* this winter and then, having rid myself of that burden, I shall be able to earn some more money again.

You are perfectly right about it's being sheer madness for the government to make the military estimates an occasion for dissolving the Reichstag, should the two year period of military service be turned down.[4] Nevertheless we cannot exclude the possibility that something of the kind may happen —considering the nature of the 'determining' factors in the German Empire today.

That Russia cannot go to war in Europe is evident from her activities in Central Asia — the other horn of her dilemma.[5] And there she is being very foolish. It will not intimidate the British but arouse their wrath and make it impossible for Mr Gladstone to give free rein to his Russophilia. While Gladstone might be prepared to sacrifice Constantinople, he could in no circumstances tolerate a threat to India; that would never do.

To me, the Isle of Wight seems intolerably boring when I think of you setting out alone on the journey on which I should have accompanied you. And then Louise goes and imagines I'm only shamming sick! Instead of sending this letter to Lunz, I should a thousand times rather have come in person. Today is the 15th day I have been confined to this little house and garden as to a prison, having in the last four days only made three excursions of three hundred paces down the road — with the result that I am again under the most stringent house and garden arrest. Today there is a flower show on the pier and tomorrow a regatta, and all the Pumpses will be going, while I shall have to stick at home — what a thrill! The only thing I am really glad about is that this trouble didn't come upon me while I was on my travels — that really would have been a pretty kettle of fish.

Well, give my regards to Victor and to his wife[6] and children; likewise to the Witch who will, I presume, have written to me in the meantime, and tell them all how very sorry I am not to be able to come out and join you. But next year, if I am still alive, I shall assuredly come.

Your

F.E.