---
id: MECW49-024
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, September 26, 1890"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "26 September 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. II, Paris, 1956 Reproduced from the original in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 4"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE FERREUX

London, 26 September 1890

My dear Löhr,

Yesterday we celebrated your impending birthday by a bottle of good claret, and to-day we shall drink, in honour of the real event, a bottle of champaign and wish you many happy returns of the day, hoping that you have only arrived

*nel mezzo del cammin delta tua vita.*[1]

As a birthday present herewith your share in Meissner's remittance of £45, just to hand, in shape of a cheque for £15; it comes very ap- propriate!

The last No. of the *Sozialdemokrat* is creating a stir here — Edward yesterday had a long extract in *The Daily Chronicle,* and is to inter- view E. Bernstein for Monday's *Star* (with photograph).

Meissner has not yet sent the account, only the remittance, so further particulars must be delayed.

Love from Nim, Schorlemmer and yours ever

F. Engels

Next time you come here you will be able to have a hot bath in the house. The old Marquis[2] died some time ago and the estate has gone into the hands of other agents, so I *posais la question du cabinet*[3] and gave notice unless a new kitchen range and a new bath with hot wa- ter arrangements was put in. To-day the people have been here to look at the premises and I am informed that these demands of mine will be complied with. Of course there may be some little difficulty yet, but from what I hear I believe that I have carried my point.

The box of pears has not arrived yet, up to 3 p. m. to-day, but very likely it will be here before dinner.