---
id: MECW49-025
title: "Letter to Friedrich Adolph Sorge, September 27, 1890"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "27 September 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "First published abridged in *Briefe und Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Phil. Becker, Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx u. A. an F.A. Sorge und Andere,* Stuttgart, 1906 and in full in: Marx and "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FRIEDRICH ADOLPH SORGE

IN HOBOKEN

London, 27 September 1890

Dear Sorge,

Both your letters of the 10th of this month have arrived. Today I am enclosing some copies of the last issue of the *Sozialdemokrat* with the usual newspapers. You might care to have some extra copies of this historic issue.

Your information about Schewitsch is probably correct.[1] When he passed through London, he ran into Tussy at a meeting and told her he had heard that I had expressed myself in very malicious terms about him, which was why he preferred not to call on me. I lay this at the door of the noble Jonas — though it may also have been due to the prickings of an uneasy conscience. It's the same old story as with so many Russians — *une jeunesse orageuse et une vieillesse blasée*[2] as one of them has put it.

Grunzig is a belletrist. And the rebellious little undergraduates in Germany are also belletrists (more *triste* than *belle*)[3] who are out to revolutionise the whole of literature. This explains the whole business of the *Volkszeitung* article,[4] for the MUTUAL ASSURANCE CO. run by these gents also comprises Grunzig. Come to that, if a chap's called Grunzig or Greulich[5] he'd do best to vanish without trace.

I spent half of August and September in Folkestone near Dover, and this extra recuperation after the trip to North Cape has done me a power of good. I am refreshed and once more game for anything and, indeed, have an enormous amount to do — everybody looks to me now.

Much will now be clarified by the congresses — Lille, 9 October, French *parti ouvrier*[6][7] (ours); Calais, 13 October, ditto trades unions; Halle, 12 October will be the most important.[8] I shall now tell you what is going on (*for your own information* — nothing whatever must get into the press about it):

The Brussels chaps, entrusted by the Possibilists with the convocation of *their* congress in Belgium,[9] invited the Liverpool TRADES UNION congress,[10] who accepted with alacrity. In this way the English are committed and we have been placed in something of a predicament. After consulting the people over here, therefore, I asked first the French and then the Germans[11] to pave the way for the amalgamation of both the 1891 congresses, always supposing it is possible to obtain acceptable terms, namely, sovereign powers for the congress — which the Possibilists refused to concede to us last time —, the convocation to be the responsibility of *both* mandatories of *both* the 1889 congresses, the procedure for the sending of delegates to be determined beforehand, and a few other details. The French and Germans have agreed. Since a number of representatives of foreign parties will in any case be going to Halle, I proposed that a preparatory conference be held there with a view to settling the preliminaries.[12] This, too, is well in hand. Well, I suppose that every kind of asininity will nevertheless be perpetrated there; Tussy will probably be present and put a stop to some of them but the chaps are so GUSHING in international affairs, just when this attitude is least called for, that things may take a different course from the one I have set them on. At any rate I don't rule that out. But nevertheless I think it will turn out all right.

For a start, by holding our own congress in 1889, we showed the smaller nations (the Belgians, Dutch, etc.) that we were not prepared to let them have it all their own way, and next time they'll mind their p's and q's.

Secondly, the Possibilists would appear to be in a state of complete disintegration.[13] Brousse, who controls the clique of Possibilist municipal councillors and, through them, the Labour Exchanges,[14] is openly at war with Allemane who controls the Paris trades unions and, more significantly still, is for peace with our people. Allemane wants to get into the Chamber in place of Joffrin, now defunct; Brousse wants Lavy or Gély to get in. They are so much at daggers drawn that Brousse did not dare to appear at Joffrin's funeral where Allemane acted as master of ceremonies. They have also had a row with their few supporters in the provinces. And finally their coming out in opposition to the May Day demonstration[15] did them enormous harm in the eyes of the Belgians and Dutch. Brousse and Allemane are also warring quite publicly in their papers.[16]

So favourable are the circumstances—aside from the enormous moral invigoration derived by the Germans from their electoral victory and its consequences, namely the overthrow of Bismarck and of the Anti-Socialist Law,[17] and which is directly responsible for making them the paramount party in Europe — that even with faulty tactics we can hope for victory. Either we shall succeed in obtaining fusion on a rational basis, in which case the congress will be dominated by the German and French Marxists, or the Possibilists and the few who support them will be so manifestly put in the wrong that the English (the new TRADES UNIONS) will desert them; for *in that case* we should again be able to conduct in this country a campaign as in the spring of 1889, and with even better success.

I am very glad that you intend to write for the *Neue Zeit.* If you find the conditions of payment unsatisfactory — needless to say, you must be paid at American rates — don't hesitate to tell them what you want, and refer the chaps to me. The *Neue Zeit* could become an organ of great importance. Bernstein will write from this country, Lafargue from Paris, and Bebel will do the weekly survey on Germany; that he can make a brilliant job of it has already been demonstrated in the Vienna *Arbeiter-Zeitung.* I never formed a definite opinion about events in Germany until I read Bebel's articles on them. The lucid, objective way in which he presented the facts without allowing himself to be swayed by his own preferences was unsurpassed.

The *Sozialdemokrat* leaves a very big gap. However, before two years are out we shall be quarrelling openly with little Willie and then we may see some fun.

Regards from Schorlemmer who is here, and from myself to you and your wife.

Your

F.E.

I expect to get the 4th edition of *Capital,* Vol. I shortly, whereupon you shall instantly have a copy. The preface[18] might provide matter for the *Volkszeitung.*