---
id: MECW49-103
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, April 30, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "30 April 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published in *Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky,* Prag, 1935 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 30 April 1891

Dear Baron,

I have before me your letters of the 5th and 25th. *Ad vocem Brentano*[1] —Herkner, to whom I sent a copy, has replied to the effect that, while the allegation of deliberate falsification could not be substantiated, Marx had nevertheless, if no doubt unintentionally, used quotations in *Capital* of such a kind that no clear idea could be obtained of Gladstone's real views, etc.—on the whole, everything you'd expect of so 'ardent' a disciple of Brentano's.

You will have got my postcard about Rave.[2] Laura Lafargue is going to read over and correct his translation of the *Origin,*[3] otherwise I could hardly have entrusted him with the thing. He will probably take some time over your *Morus*[4] which he wishes to translate; he spoke of having to do 'more rewarding, i.e. better paid' work.

I cannot begrudge Schmidt the lectureship—something he and his parents have dreamed of for years. And in present-day Switzerland even a Marxian stands some chance. True, you have thereby lost a most reliable—if not most tractable—fellow editor; however, someone will doubtless turn up to whom you can entrust much of the mechanical stuff, at any rate.

If Liebknecht were to leave Berlin for Leipzig many people besides yourself would be *instantly* overjoyed. But I don't believe it will happen. It would mean his abdicating. In Leipzig—what historical irony!—he would be the Social-Democratic Bismarck of Friedrichsruh[5] which would eventually lead to a rumpus. Whether things will go on much longer without there being one is in any case questionable.

The Peruvian affair interests me very much; I should be glad if you could send me the *Ausland* articles.[6] But tell me *when* you have got to have them back, and I can regulate my reading accordingly.

I wrote to Rave about your *Morus* as follows:[7] **Le "Thomas Morus" de Kautsky contient un aperçu généralement juste, et sous beaucoup d'aspects original, de la période de la renaissance dans les pays de réforme protestante, et surtout l'Angleterre. C'est de cet aperçu général des conditions historiques de la période que se dégage la personnalité de T. More, comme enfant de son temps. La renaissance italienne et française, par conséquent, ne figurent dans le livre qu'à l'arrière-plan. J'écrirai à Kautsky un de ces jours, et je le prierai de vous envoyer son livre, je crois que vous trouverez, qu'il vaut bien la peine d'être traduit.**[8]

I have no recollection whatever of Marx's Geneva memorandum.[9] We are now engaged in sorting out the old letters and newspapers and I shall see if I can find it. But just now I haven't got much time to look, let alone do notes, etc., on it. I have got to make sure of getting back to Volume III[10] and have firmly resolved to be ruthless about refusing *any more work*—were it only 3 lines—unless of the *utmost urgency,* and likewise to restrict my correspondence to *bare essentials,* until I have done with Volume III. First, of course, there's the *Origin*[11] which I shall, I think, get round to next week. Meanwhile Louise will search for the Geneva document. However, it may take some time; the quantity of stuff is tremendous and the disorder even more so.

As you will have seen, the *Vorwärts* has altered course somewhat[12] in regard to the miners' strike.[13] Liebknecht is hopeless in such matters. The man has only two colours on his palette, black and white, with no nuances in between, so what can one do? Our chaps in Berlin see everything solely from their *own* standpoint. Thus they sometimes forget that, unlike the party *veterans,* the miners cannot be expected to have the kind of discipline that would have been drilled into them by the Anti-Socialist Law; they also forget *that every* new group of workers *accrues to us* as the result of injudicious and necessarily unsuccessful wild-cat strikes which, however, are inevitable in the circumstances. I shall write to Bebel about this.[14] You can't just enjoy what is pleasing in a movement; you also have to put up with its momentary unpleasantnesses. Come to that, the strict discipline of a *sect* cannot be maintained in the case of a *big party,* nor is this altogether a bad thing.

As for Lafargue, don't let yourself be confused. Lafargue is a bit of an *enfant gâté*[15] and is enamoured of his prehistoric theories which do not by any means always hold water. Hence his Adam and Eve[16] are dear to his heart and seem to him far more important than Zola, for whom he's just the right sort of chap.[17] And the delay over the paradisal Platonists—who only learnt what's what when chucked out by old Jahweh—coming as it does so hard on the heels of the affair of his other, economic, article,[18] is to him a personal affront. Now, all of a sudden, he expects the *Neue Zeit* to carry nothing but Adam and Eve articles, as though it had been in the habit of doing so before. Now he looks for a contrast, which is non-existent, between the old and the new *Neue Zeit,* and behaves as though the paper had never before contained any *articles d'actualité.*[19] I find the *Neue Zeit* far better than it used to be—no one, surely, can expect me to read the serials; it has at last succeeded in getting Schippel to write really good articles that are a pleasure to read. That a weekly must give *more* space than a monthly to *actualités* goes without saying. If you could find a niche for Adam and Eve before too long, then all would be well.

The American militia system is *in practice* nothing but a kind of *national guard* of middle-class volunteers, and as much as 10 years ago Hyndman wrote to Marx from America saying that the middle classes there did a vast amount of drill so as to protect themselves against the workers. Proof of how utterly useless this is against an *external* enemy may be found in all the wars the United States has ever fought using newly formed regiments of volunteers (enlisted men)—on the largest scale of all in the Civil War when the militia melted away completely. Even when I was in America I heard of the militia regiments' ARMORIES which were said to be veritable fortresses in the heart of New York. Until such time as every working man has a rifle and a hundred live rounds at home, the whole thing will remain an absurdity.[20]

Your old friend

F. E.

As you know, Mother Besant has now joined Grandmother Blavatsky's (Blamatsky's?)[21] Theosophists. Now, writ large in gold on her garden gate at 19 Avenue Road, is the legend: THEOSOPHICAL HEADQUARTERS. Such is the result of Herbert Burrows' love.