---
id: MECW49-217
title: "Letter to Paul and Laura Lafargue, May 27, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "27 May 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in: F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, Paris, 1959 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49 Translated from the French"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO PAUL AND
LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 27 May 1892

My dear Lafargue,

I congratulate you on your success. With your daily now under way (unless you get thrown out again, which would *be jour* fault entirely this time), and with the provinces TO BACK YOU, you will conquer Paris under the noses of the Possibilo-Blanquists.

Bebel and Singer are here.[1] This morning I had a talk with Bebel on the subject of a German correspondent, *lîyou haven't yet written to Berlin about this matter,* we would ask you not to do so for the moment, but in the meantime to let us know what kind of information you require—reports on the situation in general and on that of the Party in particular?

As for me, I can only say that if you could get Bebel to act as your correspondent you would have reports of the utmost value. At the time of the Anti-Socialist Law Bebel wrote a weekly report for Adler's *Arbeiter-Leitung* in Vienna. Those reports were such that, before forming a definite opinion on an important fact or an important matter affecting Germany at that time, I would always try to read what Bebel had to say in his articles. It was clear, concise, TO THE POINT and always accurate.

Bebel would write in German and Laura would, I trust, translate. You would *have facts,* whereas all you would get out of Liebknecht would be hot air. And Liebknecht would pride himself on writing to you in French. You would correct his style and he would tell you that you had mangled his facts and ideas.

I shall write to Rave as soon as I have received and read Roy's translation. It's a ticklish matter and I shouldn't like Laura's work to be wasted. What I have read of it is decidedly better than Roy's translation.[2] And then there's the question of a publisher! Has he got one? As for Rave's promises, which he hasn't kept, he excuses himself on the grounds that he has been held up by the additions to the fourth edition. Anyway it's a pretty unpleasant business, which I can't really fathom at this moment. However we shall see.

Now my dear Löhr a few words with you. In that new daily paper you are an absolutely necessary factor. If the thing is to be superior to the usual run of Parisian dailies, there must be somebody who follows closely from day to day, and reports on, from time to time, the English and German movement. And you are the only person in *toute la belle France*[3] who can do this. I have no doubt that you are perfectly ready to undertake this work, which fortunately can be done very comfortably at Le Perreux, as it will not matter a bit whether *these* news, generally, are published a day sooner or a day later. But what I want to drive into you, poking your ribs with both my forefingors, is that you must be a regular member of the *rédaction* and paid accordingly. Paul is too much of an hidalgo to think of, or to press, such matters, but **it mun be done** as they say in Lancashire, and I think it is my duty to call your and Paul's attention to it. The subject is too important to be neglected, and it will not be properly treated unless you are *rédactrice du Socialiste quotidien*[4] and charged with that special branch.

Bebel and Louise send their kindest regards.

Ever yours,

F E.