---
id: MECW49-110
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, June 13, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 June 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published in *Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mit Kautsky,* Prag 1935 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 13 June 1891

Dear Kautsky,

Article on Peru[1] received with thanks. Perhaps you would allow me to keep it here until I have completed the new edition[2] of the *Origin.* In another article on Negro customs in East Africa[3] I came across a note to the effect that out there a woman's clitoris is cut off before marriage; Sam Moore wrote and told me that this peculiar custom is observed along the River Niger for a distance of more than a hundred miles, though not in *his* locality where he has satisfied himself as to the presence of the said organ.

The introduction[4] to the new edition of the *Origin* is ready and I shall send it off to you next week in case you might wish to use it beforehand for the *Neue Zeit.* If so, please let me have the proofs — in fact, three lots—, the third will go to Rave for the French translation which is finished so far as the old edition goes. Incidentally, Rave doesn't know enough German, Strasbourger though he may be. He has made atrocious howlers, thereby involving Laura Lafargue in a colossal amount of work. I'm only surprised that she took it on at all.

So you can inform Dietz that he won't have to wait much longer. But he might let me know the *number* of the new edition. The chaps have gone ahead so fast with the 5,000 copies printed in Zurich that I no longer have the slightest idea where I am. Is this the 2nd, 3rd, 4th or which edition?

The fee for Marx's article[5] received with thanks and already distributed. With regard to the payment for the new edition of the *Poverty of Philosophy* (and similarly for the *first edition as well*—for which we asked nothing at the time), perhaps you would be so good as to make provisional arrangements with Dietz. If, having done so, you then tell me what percentage of the *total fee* for the *new* edition ought to be allocated to *yourselves,* i.e. to you and Ede, and what percentage to *Marx's heirs,* I shall be able to form a better opinion. But the pair of you mustn't lose by it.

A stop ought to be put to Grillenberger's machinations, or at any rate he should be made to pay the fees. If he publishes Marx's speech on free trade[6] in your joint translation, you and Ede, not to mention Clara Zetkin, must protest and I should then do the same on behalf of the heirs—as a matter of principle. As regards the *Origin,* I have been much delayed through having had to consult all the relevant literature. There is no bigger mutual assurance society than the specialists in prehistory. They're a bunch of scoundrels who indulge in camaraderie and cliquish boycotting on an international scale made possible by their relatively small numbers. Now, however, a new element has entered upon the scene in the shape of comparative jurisprudence and, while it has its bad aspects, it may well break up the old ring.

Yesterday Ede showed me Bebel's letter to you. You gave Simon his deserts.[7] Things never turn out particularly well if one aims at 'moderation'; a punch, however, hits home. Odd the way this chap behaves as though 100% of medical men were on his side instead of perhaps 1%.

Your 'Emancipation of the 4th Volume'[8] is nothing by comparison with the 'liberation from feudal *seats***[9] they inflicted on me in the Berlin edition of the *Entwicklung des Sozialismus.*[10] Imagine what the evolution of socialism would look like had it happened[11] in Berlin!**

Just let the chaps get on with their programme.[12] Bebel will make sure all right that none of the old Liebknechtian vulgar democratic and vulgar socialist catchwords find their way into it. It's quite a good thing that the people in Berlin should first discuss the subject amongst themselves; what they suggest can only be an improvement on the old programme and will still be open to discussion. The disenchantment of our friends who, after a 13 years' interval, are now obliged to meet Liebknecht face to face again and work with him, is really too comical. While the Anti-Socialist Law was in force, he remained ensconced in Borsdorf, concerning himself with nothing save his correspondence. Now, 13 years later, the chaps find him completely changed. On the contrary, *he* has remained as he was; it is *they* who have progressed and are now aware that a great chasm exists. Now nothing happens without there being a rumpus, now they find that Liebknecht is editing the paper[13] out of existence. He did no better by the *Volksstaat,* etc., but then he was helped by the others to keep the paper afloat; now they have other things to do and now they have a Liebknechtian paper *tout pur,*[14] i. e. Liebknecht and *family!*

Lafargue's interpretation of the Bible is very pretty — callow but original, marking the final break with the now outmoded, German-rationalist philological method. As a beginning it's all one could ask for.[15]

The OMNIBUS STRIKE has been won![16] At any rate on the main issue. London without omnibuses was and is an odd sort of place. Ede ought to send you a description of it for the feuilleton; I shall tell him so tomorrow. He is enduring his grass widowhood with manly resignation, assisted by us. Kindest regards.

Your

F.E.