---
id: MECW49-120
title: "Letter to Laura Lafargue, July 12, 1891"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 July 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English), in F. Engels, P. et L. Lafargue, *Correspondance,* t. III, Paris, 1959 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 49"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO LAURA LAFARGUE

AT LE PERREUX

London, 12 July 1891

My dear Laura,

Paul sends me from Lille the enclosed.[1] As I do not know where he may be now, I return and reply to you.

First I have absolutely no time to do *un vrai travail*[2] for Duc- Quercy, in order that he may make out of it *un article à sensation.* I am finishing the *Origin*[3] and then I shall go and recover a bit of nervous tension, as I do feel rather unstrung. And after that—the 3rd volume[4] and nothing else. That is settled long since and cannot and shall not be unsettled.

If I was to write on such a ticklish question and for such a ticklish public as the French, I should certainly do it myself under my name; but never allow a journalist to turn my letter into an interview and put into my mouth, French fashion, not what I did say but what in his opinion I ought to have said.

But finally I am not capable of writing on the 3 questions proposed in a style to please the French bourgeois and readers of the *Figaro.* I should have to remind them of the fact that by their submission, for 20 years, to the adventurer Louis Bonaparte they laid the foundation for all the wars that have come over us since 1850, including the Franco-German war; that that war originated, *en dernier lieu,*[5] in their claim to interfere in German internal affairs, a claim which they even now think they have a right to; that if they lost Alsace etc. *c'était la fortune de la guerre*[6] and that I do most distinctly object to the whole fate of Europe and of the working class being made subordinate to the question as to who is to have that miserable bit of country. All this might be very useful to tell them, but would they even listen to it without accusing me of having stolen a *pendule?*

However that may be, I have no time and cannot submit to Duc- Quercy's manipulations. These are the two decisive points.

What Paul has written to me about Renard and his intended dec- laration, that *he* said the words attributed to Paul, he will have let you know even before me. I hope these things will help to smash up the verdict.[7]

Edward[8] is at St Margaret's Bay, he suffers from the kidneys again; so we shall have only Tussy and Sam Moore here. Wednesday[9]

Louise intends going to Vienna, I expect Schorlemmer and then we will see what we may do. I have no fixed plans yet for the summer, but various nebulous projects are colliding in my brain.

Another thing. I should not like just now to speak about matters connected with the Vallmar affair[10] while the thing is being thrashed out in Germany. Anything I said in France might be used, misused and abused against them in Germany, and render their posi- tion more difficult. And it is well known to them all that I have re- fused to do any work for anybody until after the conclusion of Volume III.[11]

I believe I sent you the second batch of Field-Burrows letters in *The Star.* Anyhow the matter has blown over—thanks to the accident of the Belgian Circular of 18th June. This complete submission of the Belgians to the Halle Resolutions so upset all Hyndman's calcula- tions that he is now in a towering rage against them, threatens them with his vengeance, but still holds back. In the meantime he ruins his last hopes in the East End by attacking the Gas Workers (most of the leaders of whom are in the Social Democratic Federation) and Tussy whom he calls Miss Marx. That's the degree of lowness he has come to.

Kind regards from Louise.

Ever yours,

F.E.

Tussy and I have just been talking over Nimmy's inscription. After various proposals of various epithets, to all of which objections may be made, I incline to Tussy's proposal to put nothing but the name. Then the inscription would run

In memory of

*Jenny Marx*

and of

*Karl Marx*

and of

*Harry Longuet*

also of

*Helen Demuth*

Born January 1st 1823, Died November 4th 1890

What do you think?