---
id: MECW49-273
title: "Letter to Karl Kautsky, September 26, 1892"
volume: 49
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "26 September 1892"
year: 1892
publication: "First published in *Aus der Frühzeit des Marxismus. Engels Briefwechsel mil Kautsky,* Prag 1935 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO KARL KAUTSKY

IN STUTTGART

London, 26 September 1892

Dear Baron,

Herewith what I consider to be indispensable amendments[1] to the two passages.[2]

I. As regards the adoption on the last day of a resolution to attend the Zurich Congress'[3] after all, I have neither read anything to that effect, nor have I heard anything from Aveling who was present. Something of the kind is said to have appeared in the *Daily Telegraph* but this cannot be ascertained today. Aveling, who was intending to come here, has *not* so far, 4.40, turned up, so I am unable to ask him. The report in the *Daily News* says nothing of the kind. Nor does that in the *Workman's Times.* Bebel may have seen something of the sort in the *Frankfurter*.^b Consequently, I think it might be safest to qualify the passage as you have done.

II. It is true that a meeting of people describing themselves as the INDEPENDENT LABOUR PARTY took place in Glasgow under the chairmanship of Keir Hardie. It is, however, the INDEPENDENT LABOUR PARTY which Burgess (Autolycus) of the *Workman's Times* is attempting to constitute off his own bat, and in no sense a genuine, recognised party like, say, our own in Germany or Austria; rather it is a sect like the SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC FEDERATION 29 with which it is in competition. Bebel was probably misled by Keir Hardie's name into taking the thing more seriously than it deserved. But Keir Hardie is a Scot and his diplomacy is too canny by half; moreover he has an urge to make the most of his new position as M. P. (thereby occasionally making a fool of himself) but will probably turn out well once he's had a chance to sow his wild oats. To my mind he is better than he *seems* to be just now.

I shall write to Bebel[4] about this, in fact shall do so now. More anon. Ede should be back tomorrow or on Wednesday. Your commissions shall be carried out.

Your

F.E.