---
id: MECW40-260
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, June 7, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 June 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

[London,] 7 June [1859]

DEAR Frederick,

You must excuse me for not writing to you before, and only these few lines. My time has been completely taken u p with work and with running private and party errands.

*D'abord*[1] I was delighted to hear that you liked the first instalment,[2] for your opinion is the only one I value in this matter. T o my wife's considerable AMUSEMENT, I awaited WITH SOME ANXIETY YOUR JUDGMENT.

*Ad vocem*'[3]Volk':* Admittedly its administration leaves a great deal to be desired, since there is only one type-setter, no errand-boy, etc., on top of which not a single 'trustworthy' despatch clerk has yet presented himself, and above all, no money. Nevertheless, recent issues have been virtually sold out and if ways and means*

can be found of appointing a reasonably reliable despatch clerk, the thing will survive. Moreover, the 'little sheet', although only indirectly given a TURN by us, has set the whole of democracy by the ears. Not just here, but also in Switzerland, where Vogt- Kinkel have pitched into me in the *Handels-Courier* with one of those blackguardly little articles with which you are familiar.[4] I'll get them to reproduce it in the next number.[5]

I shall speak to Biskamp on the Manchester question. For his part, *he* asked me yesterday to write and tell *you* that *not a single* copy had been ordered in Manchester. It looks to me as though *Hollinger* (the printer) has already been bribed by Kinkel. *Nous verrons.*[6]

Kinkel, following an audience with Kossuth and money pay- ments from Vogt, has gone over to the camp of high treason. Bücher and Blind have resigned in 'indignation'. Kinkel's col- leagues are now as follows: Bamberger, Ed. Bauer, Beta *(How do you do?)* and Born[7] (our ex-Born's brother). A fine lot. Add to which one or two old whores.

*Ad vocem Freiligrath.* Between ourselves, a rotter. Having now seen that things are taking a revolutionary TURN (you must have heard about the labour RIOT in Berlin)[8] and that Kinkel is becoming DISRESPECTABLE, he reviles him. But the sixth and last volume of his collected works (*^s'**/é***** of it translated rubbish) published in America, which he has just received and sent me, concludes with the poem about Johanna Mockel,[9] whereas he has suppressed the anfi-Kinkel poem.[10] This is a filthy thing to do and it was with very sceptical mien that I listened to his excuses on the subject. The devil take the bardic profession.**

*Ad vocem Vogt.* Has placed himself at Prussia's 'disposal' in the *Volks-Zeitung* (Berlin).

*Ad vocem Duncker.* That dolt Duncker, to whom I had written in exceedingly rude terms about his dilly-dallying, has sent me a letter admitting outright that the last delay of 3 weeks (when *everything* had been completed save for the list of misprints) was *due to the publication* of the 'anonymous pamphlet',[11] the one concocted of 'sweat, fire and logic'.[12] I *deliberately* divulged to the press the fact that you were the author of *Po and Rhine,* because

I had good reason to suppose that the author of the 'anonymous pamphlet' was quietly 'switching places' with you. I must say, it's a bit thick, Mr Lassalle placing an embargo on me at will! The thing is coming out in Berlin this week—my first instalment, I mean.

Finally, whatever happens and as soon as the MEANS READY, I shall come to Manchester for a few days as we have all sorts of things to settle.[13]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Regards to lupullum.[14] Tomorrow I shall send you copies of the *Presse* (in which quarter the 'anonymous one' has put a spoke in my wheel good and proper).

The rotten STAFF here is no joke, I assure you. Biskamp at least writes quickly and has a ready wit. Liebknecht is AN AWFUL NUISANCE. Due to his over-ingenious manoeuvrings, the little sheet was only able to publish the gossip about Kinkel and Bauer in a much attenuated form.[15]

Your article[16] appeared in the *Volk* on the same day it arrived. The last number contains the preface to my affair,[17] i. e. with such omissions as Mr Biskamp thought fit.