---
id: MECW40-273
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, August 3, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 August 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 3 August 1859

7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

Herewith the beginning of the article about your book.[1] Take a good look at it and, if you don't like it *in toto,* tear it up and let me have your opinion. Through lack of practice I have grown so unused to this sort of writing that your wife will be greatly tickled by my awkwardness. If you can knock it into shape, do so. A few convincing examples of the materialistic viewpoint would not come amiss, in place of my indifferent reference to the February revolution[2]

As soon as I've done with this thing, I shall set to work on 'Infantry', which will, however, demand a good deal of time and trouble, despite Rüstow, who must, of course, be treated with some reserve.[3]

Can you shed any further light on the particulars contained in Crawshay's letter in *The Free Press* of 27 July regarding the Russian document?[4] Surely the 'German' isn't Mr Bücher? And in which German paper is the thing supposed to have appeared?[5]

When you saw Blind, did you speak to him about the Vogt affair?[6] *N'y avait-il rien à faire?*[7]

The gentle Heinrich[8] is acquitting himself well in his new role. Gloomy as ever, but all the lazier for that, redeeming the world by his courageous and intelligent GRUMBLING.

Lupus has had another adventure, this time with a parson who swapped travelling bags with him. The deadly earnestness of the affair was, however, alleviated by the fact that the bag that had been left behind contained the said parson's MAIDEN SERMON which he was due to rattle off the following day. This lent the thing certain humorous *extérieurs,* otherwise Lupus was again on the point of exclaiming: * 'There are so many rogues in this country, and not of the working class, but of the middle class.' *

Your

F. E.