---
id: MECW40-124
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 5, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "5 January 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed acc"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 5 January [1858]

Dear Engels,

Have had your note. You don't say whether you have received my letter *enclosing those of Lassalle and Friedländer.*[1] I'd like to be sure that both will be preserved.

As to C, I am IN FACT in a considerable quandary. Nothing more has been sent to Dana since 27 November,[2] as I finished my own share of it (i.e. the non-military stuff) long ago. If circumstances in Manchester don't admit of your seriously applying yourself to the business this month, I shall have to give it up altogether and tell Dana on some PRETEXT or other that I can't go on with the *Cyclopaedia.* The fact that I send him long, new lists before polishing off the old ones cannot fail in the end to arouse his suspicions and compromise me. CONSEQUENTLY he's not even answering, let alone sending anything fresh. Nor can work of this kind be remunerative when there are constant hiatuses of a month or more.

STILL, I try to avoid mentioning the matter to you because the last thing I want is to subject you to any strain that might damage your health. YET sometimes it seems to me that, if you could manage to do a *little* every two days or so, it might act as a CHECK on your junketings which, from what I know of Manchester and AT THE PRESENT EXCITED TIMES, seem to me 'unavoidable' and far from good for you.

Nor can there be any question at present of my taking over the military stuff, which would entail spending a great deal of time at the Museum[3] to no real effect, for it's absolutely essential that I should finish off my other work[4] —and it takes up *all* my time—even if the house should come tumbling about my ears!

So, *my boy, try to come to a definitive resolution—one way or the other*.

Warm regards.

Your

K. M.