---
id: MECW40-056
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 31, 1857"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "31 March 1857"
year: 1857
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 31 March 1857

Dear Marx,

You will have received the *£5* note, K/S 84562, this morning. As regards 'depending on' me, don't give it another thought. I should take umbrage if you were *not* to inform me when the SOVEREIGNS' armed intervention is required. I shall see how my finances go in April; I think I shall be able to manage a bit more during the second half, at any rate.

The *Tribune's* proposal is most cunning and, since the chaps are practically *certain* to print only one article a week, I shouldn't send two save on special occasions such as the present elections, etc., etc. However, circumstances will come to your aid, and in all probability the good Yankees will have no reason to complain about the DULLNESS OF EUROPEAN POLITICS this summer and autumn, while their own merry-go-round will gradually come to a halt.

I have hardly followed the Persian and Chinese military ventures[1] at all, indeed there has been a great dearth of detail. About Captain Jones I know nothing. It would now be utterly impossible to get together the necessary material, but when we get fuller news about the last big cavalry attack in Persia I shall see what can be done.

The pamphlets have arrived.[2] If only I could get hold of your old *Tribune* articles![3] Most of the stuff is in them. Washington Wilks[4] and *Palmerston for Premier* contain only generalities, and Chisholm Anstey's speech in the House of Commons on 23 February 1848 is fearfully disjointed though very important, more especially by reason of the personal matters relating to the *Portfolio*[5] but also, here and there, by reason of its contents. The only really cogent pamphlets are your two Tucker pamphlets, especially *Unkiar Skelessi.* If you can supply me with any more material, so much the better I have taken steps to improve the storage arrangements.

The eight thousand philistines who voted for the fattest man in Manchester (Potter) because he makes up for his lack of brains by the size of his bottom, are already ashamed of their victory. All the same, the elections have made an enormous impression here, and the 'Manchester' Party[6] is beginning to take stock of its performance over the past 6 years and to discover in what it has failed. I don't think we shall hear very much more of PEACE-PARTY TALK 155 for the time being, while on the other hand Bright *(if* he rallies) will, with one or two others, undoubtedly advocate a more far-reaching electoral reform and, before long, Jones may well receive some propositions from these bourgeois. For Pam the most gratifying thing must be his triumph over Bright, Gibson, Cobden,

Miall and Fox (Oldham); I am inclined to believe that the fellow will get a WORKING MAJORITY of 60-100. But be that as it may, we shall have unadulterated Palmerston and WITH A VENGEANCE I've found one of the passages from the *Nord* in *The Morning Post,* but only eulogising his abilities.[7] The one in which he appears as a 'TRULY BRITISH MINISTER' is not to be found. Our local Palmerstonians and bourgeois offered Bob Lowe, should he be defeated here, the sum of *£2,000* to cover his election expenses in some other wretched hole. The ass refused, preferring the safety of Kidderminster, only to be trounced there. But never again will he be able to come to Manchester; he has behaved like a real blackguard—first he allows the philistines to compromise themselves on his behalf, then cries off and, *at the same time,* writes an article for *The Times* in which he says it would be scandalous if Manchester were *not* to return Bright.[8]

This time Philistia was tremendously divided. The vast majority of the bourgeoisie, a small majority of the lower-middle class, against Bright and Gibson. Quakers and Catholics for Bright to a man; the Greeks likewise; the *established* Germans against him. A drunken anti-Bright man shouted: 'WE WONT HAVE HOME POLICY, WE WANT FOREIGN POLICY.' What the rationale of the local elections more or less amounts to is: To hell with all questions of reform and class matters. After all, we philistines form the majority of voters, that suffices. The clamour against the aristocracy, etc., is tedious and produces no tangible result. WE DEARLY LOVE A LORD FOR ALL THAT. We've got FREE TRADE and as much *bourgeois* social reform as we require. We're flourishing like mad, especially since Pam reduced war INCOME TAX. So let's all foregather on territory where we are all equal, and let's be ENGLISHMEN, John Bulls, under the leadership of that TRULY BRITISH MINISTER Pam. Such is the present mood of the majority of philistines.

What is piquant about the business up here is the burial of the Anti-Corn Law League; Smith P. Robinson (HON. SEC) and George Wilson, 'THAT RESPECTABLE FIXTURE' are being thrown out of Newalls Buildings and the GREAT LIBERAL PARTY is casting about for a new organisation. G. Wilson loses his snug berth and his status on the strength of which he rose to be CHAIRMAN of the Lancashire and Yorkshire railways at a salary of £1,000 per annum—another snug berth that will soon go west, permitting

Wilson to go back to starch manufacturing as in the days of PROTECTION. But your Manchester philistine—even if a partisan of Bright—heaves a sigh of relief at the long-awaited demise of that old incubus, THE LEAGUE![9]

Apropos, I believe that the Ch. Anstey pamphlet contains only a small part of Pam's reply[10] —the debate lasted 4 days. Couldn't you get hold of the rest? And could you send me a copy of Urquhart's new rag,[11] or whatever it's called? What is there in it by you?

NB. You might also, if called for, send me the tides of anything else *of any use* concerning the Pam affair; I could then get them myself up here.

Hearty congratulations on your family prospects. What are the girls doing? They must be quite big by now. I look forward very much to seeing them at Whitsun. Warm regards to them and your wife.

Your

F. E.