---
id: MECW40-287
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 28, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "28 September 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 28 September [1859]

Dear Engels,

Yesterday evening I had a visit from Lessner, whom I had sent for in connection with the Manchester subscribers to the *Volk.*

Like Biskamp, he assures me that (apart from Lupus) there wasn't a single direct subscriber to the *Volk.* And up till now no one has sent a FARTHING to London.

After the *Volk* ceased publication Thimm wrote to Lessner asking for an account. Lessner replied that he could send him an account only in respect of the period in which he, Lessner, had been despatch clerk. He then sent him an invoice for the *individual numbers.* Up till yesterday there had been no reply from Thimm.

So I'd like to know what fellows are kicking up the fuss in Manchester and on what PRETEXT.

Down here we (and I especially) have unpleasantnesses enough in respect of the *Volk* without that.

The 'Particulars' about Kossuth in *The Free Press* are mine.[1] (I have made 2 articles out of them for the *Tribune* and shall see whether they are accepted.) I got them from Szemere, partly in writing, partly by word of mouth. Szemere was here a few weeks ago.

*Salut.* Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

It's doubtful whether Biskamp will pull through. The poor devil is as low as can be. We seem to attract every damned spot of bother that's going.