---
id: MECW40-009
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 25, 1856"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "25 March 1856"
year: 1856
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] Tuesday [25 March 1856][1]

Dear Engels,

In one of my next letters I shall reply to your last. Today simply an inquiry, to which I should like, if possible, an answer *by return.* I did *not* send any article to the *Tribune* today because I hadn't finished reading the *BLUE BOOK*:[2] on Kars—I only got hold of it late yesterday evening. I have to send off my article[3] on Friday, at the same time as the one I am expecting from you. Well, *ad rem*[4]

A large part of the BLUE BOOK is of a purely military nature; you will be able to see later whether anything can be done with it. But there's one point on which I want your critical OPINION, since it is also material to the political-diplomatic aspect of the matter and I have got to discuss it in *this* Friday's article. At the end of June the Turks proposed to send reinforcements to Redoute-Kaleh[5] in order to operate from there in the direction of Kutais,[6] etc. The British government, on the other hand, wanted to send a relief force to Erzerum via Trebizond and, it seems, to abandon Kars as a place of little importance, regarding Erzerum as the centre of resistance. At all events this dispute meant that the moment propitious for action was irretrievably lost. So that you may be FULLY informed on the QUESTION I append here the crucial EXTRACTS.

*Stratford de Redcliffe to Clarendon.* 28th June, 1855.

*Id to id., 30th June, 1855.*

*Id. to id., 1st July, 1855*

*Clarendon to Stratford de Redcliffe.* July 13th, 1855.

*Id. to id., 14th July, 1855 (telegraphic).*

*Id. to id., 16th July, 1855.*

*Lord Panmure to General Vivian,* 14th July, 1855.

I must confess that Clarendon's strategy strikes me as curious in the extreme, as does also the fine distinction drawn by Lord Panmure Carnot favouring the Sevastopol **coup de main** against the Turkish plan for a strategic move in Georgia.

If possible, then, an answer to these points *by return. Salut.*

Your

K. M.