---
id: MECW40-254
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 27, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "27 May 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works. First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed acc"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 27 May [1859]

Dear Engels,

£ 5 received. You must COLOUR YOUR WAR-ARTICLES A LITTLE MORE seeing that you are writing for A GENERAL NEWSPAPER, not for a scientific military journal.

Something more descriptive and individual could easily be gleaned from the *Times* CORRESPONDENT, etc. I can't interpolate it myself as this would lead to unevenness of style. Failing this Dana will go and insert some utter nonsense off his own bat.

Today I am sending you 2 numbers (the last ones) of the *Presse* as samples, so that you can see whether you can use the PAPER.

At 7 o'clock yesterday evening Mr Liebknecht turned up with 6 lines for *Das Volk* having, by his failure to appear (and the idiot is always taking on all manner of things), thrown the entire setting INTO DISORDER, or so Biskamp tells me. I had told the blockhead exactly which bits of your pamphlet were to be reproduced. Instead he tries to make a LEADER of it, in which, of course, he doesn't succeed. Bürgers *redivivus*[1] but far WORSE, since Bürgers could at least be used for purposes of attack in societies, etc.

Garibaldi has, in my opinion, deliberately been consigned to a position that will spell his ruin.

Unlike Kossuth who, with Klapka, has already 'recognised' 'Constantine' as the Russian king of Hungary, Mazzini (undoubtedly a greater authority on Italian patriotism than Mr Lassalle) is behaving very well.[2] I shall try and lay hands on the last, concluding number of his *Pensiero ed Azione.*[3] Send me your last copy of *Po and Rhine* for *Mazzini.* I shall write a short accompanying note, or *better still, write it yourself. Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Still nothing from Berlin today. I. e. 16 days to correct the misprints in the last 3 sheets![4]