---
id: MECW40-132
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 23, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 January 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 23 January 1858

Dear Engels,

I have received: 1. Copies of the *Guardian;* 2. C ('Carabine', etc.)[1]. You have not told me whether you got my letter, together with an enclosure for Lupus, sent off a week ago today.[2]

Herewith a letter from Dana which you must return as it has not yet been answered. One disagreeable consequence so far as I am concerned is that I am already considerably in the fellows' debt, having miscalculated what was due to me and drawn a further amount after sending off 'Cannon'. 235 The PAY, by the by, isn't even A PENNY THE LINE.

As regards the new B articles Dana is asking for—and for me the main thing is to pay off as quickly as possible what I have overdrawn on Appleton, otherwise I shall be unable to draw anything on the *Tribune* and hence be stone broke—they are, with *one* exception, taken from the list you drew up. As regards that *one exception*—'THE HISTORY OF THE BENGAL REBELLION'—I suggest the most appropriate course would be tell Dana straight out it can't be done. How get hold of the sources at such short notice? Since it 'SHALL BE SENT AT ONCE' and must be 'AS BRIEF AS POSSIBLE', the work involved would be out of all proportion to the PAY and it would simply prevent us from getting on with the other articles. What is your opinion? The military side is the more important, but it seems to me that the whole, whether military or political, has not yet reached the stage where it could be 'sent AT ONCE'.

I cannot recall the MISTAKE IN THE BATTLE OF ALBUERA' to which Dana refers.[3]

Freiligrath writes to say that the great Ernst Dronke has arrived in London from *Paris,* having left the latter place for the first time on account of the attempted assassination.[4]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

There were some nice things from the Paris correspondent in *The Manchester Guardian* you sent me. How is business in Manchester? Everything seems to be going better than expected.