---
id: MECW40-136
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 29, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "29 January 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed a"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 29 January 1858

DEAR Frederick,

The 3 B articles received.[1] It's excellent that you should have made 'Borodino' longer. Since the fellows' columns are so IMMENSE and their PAY so bad, the only remedy is to lengthen the articles. I hope that when you come to do 'Cavalry' you will spin it out as much as possible so that I can get rid of my DEBTS to those curs.

In France things are splendid. The COOLNESS with which the *épiciers*[2] responded to the news of the attempted assassination[3] has exasperated the fellow.[4] The secret of this indifference of the *épiciers* is doubtless the unspoken desire of many of them that some sudden political event should get them out of their mess. The majority of the laddies had had their bills renewed by the Bank, Discount Association, etc., which were acting on the ORDERS of Boustrapa. However, to put off is not to write off. A large number of French bourgeois, with commercial ruin staring them in the face, are anxiously awaiting the day of reckoning. They now find themselves in much the same STATE as Boustrapa *before* the coup d'état.[5] ANY POLITICAL PRETEXT FOR MAKING AN HONOURABLE EXIT WILL, CONSEQUENTLY, BE EAGERLY SEIZED UPON BY THE DAMNED FELLOWS JUST as it was 10 years ago. Boustrapa knows this and now wishes to act the real 'despot'. *Nous verrons?*[6] If he pins his faith on Magnan, Castellane, etc., he will be left high and dry.[7]

In my economic work I have now reached a point at which I could do with some information on practical matters from you, since nothing of the kind is to be found in theoretical writings. I mean, the *circulation* of capital—how it varies in various kinds of business; the effect of the same on profit and prices. If you can provide me with any information on the subject, it would be VERY welcome.

Mr Lassalle, in his preface to *Die Philosophie Herakleitos des Dunklen von Ephesos,* says *inter alia*:

'All but a small part of the same' (the book) 'was completed early in 1846, and I was on the point of putting the concluding touches to it when suddenly an interest of a different kind—how true in *every* respect is Sophocles' dictum:[8]

"iroXXà Ta ôeivà, xoùBèu àu6p<!>iToi> Seiwrepou irèXei"

— precipitated me into a welter of practical strife and prevented me over a period of nearly 10 years from devoting myself to the completion of this work.'

Do you suppose that Sophocles' verse, put into German by Lassalle, means: 'There's no more frightful specimen of *human- kind* than the Countess Hatzfeldt!'[9]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.