---
id: MECW40-301
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Lassalle, November 14, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 November 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in: *F. Lassalle. Nachgelassene Briefe und Schriften,* Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin 1922 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE[1]

IN BERLIN

London, 14 November 1859 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

I am answering your by return. It isn't a question of *your* finding the money, but of a bill transaction. Would you allow me to draw on you at 3 months? // *so* you would be provided with *security* (guaranteed not only by myself, *but also by Engels) before* the bill fell due. It's a question, therefore, of an accommodation bill or, to put it more crudely, kite-flying. It still remains very doubtful, of course, *whether* I could manage to negotiate a bill of this kind over here. However there might be some *CHANCE* of it. Engels would have procured what was necessary had not all his liquid assets been tied up as a result of an action for causing bodily harm to an Englishman.[2] The affair is costing more than £100 and accommodation bills drawn in London on Manchester are only possible between businessmen.

I think it is now too late to insert the anti-Meyen statement.[3]

Assuming the *Reform* and the Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung* accept it, it would arrive too late in Berlin.[4] Assuming they don't accept it, it will in any case be too late for any consideration of the great Meyen's article,[5] which will by then be outdated.

As regards Vogt, it behoves our party—as opposed to vulgar democracy—to force him to pick up the gauntlet thrown down by Blind. Both gentlemen seem to be equally anxious to keep their distance. It was very clever of Vogt to make me out to be the source of the denunciation, but also to select as his target the *A. Z.* in Augsburg rather than the *Volk* in London. As regards myself, he can attribute the thing to rancour, if only because of the erstwhile opposition to him on the part of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung.* (You are doubtless aware that, when Lupus came to the National Assembly in Frankfurt, he opposed Uhland's vote of thanks to John, the imperial regent. Vogt seized this opportunity to vent his spleen and made an abusive speech attacking the *N. Rh. Z. en general* and Lupus in particular. 97 Lupus thereupon called him out. But Vogt thought his skin too valuable to the Fatherland to risk it in this way. Lupus thereupon threatened to box his ears publicly in the street. Thereafter Vogt never made an appearance unless flanked by his sister on one side and a woman acquaintance of his sister's on the other. And Lupus was too courteous, etc.) But again, Mr Vogt knew that Germany's vulgar democrats regard me as their *bête noire.* Furthermore, had he sued

Das *Volk* instead of the *A. Z.,* Blind, etc., would have been legally compelled to give evidence on oath and the matter would have *been bound* to come to light. Finally, it was one thing to break a lance with a revolutionary paper direct, and quite another to do so with the reactionary *A. Z.* The way in which the 'noble' Vogt (Vogt the 'well-rounded', as his barrister described him,[6] is rather more TO THE POINT) attacked me in the Biel *Handels-Courier*[7] rejoiced my heart. I am, it seems, in communication with 'the police', live off the workers, and such-like inanities.

As to Kossuth, all the particulars about his transaction with Bonaparte were provided by Szemere (formerly Hungarian Prime Minister, presently in Paris).[8] I sent him my anti-Kossuth article[9]

in the *Tribune* and shall let you have it as soon as he returns me the cutting from Paris. The nicest part of it is that Kossuth's agent, Pulszky, is the *Tribune's* London correspondent.

The Schiller festival here was a Kinkel festival.[10] Freiligrath himself, who took part in it despite my warning, now realises that Gottfried used him simply as a tool. He told me that Kinkel's melodramatic speech was a veritable farce which literally had to be seen to be believed. You'd laugh heartily were I to tell you what

went on behind the scenes between Kinkel and Freiligrath before the public performance actually took place.[11] In the days of the

*N. Rh. Z.* Gottfried invariably figured in the press with a travelling-bag for attribute. Later on, it was a musket, then a lyre, then a distaff. Now our parson never does so without a black, red and gold flag.[12] The so-called 'working men' whom he has gathered round him belong to a guild; article 1 of the rules of their society runs: 'In accordance with the rules, all politics are to be excluded from the society's debates.' Before 1848 these same fellows enjoyed Bunsen's patronage.

Well, enough of gossip, for this note was simply intended to be *de re pecuniaria.*[13] *Salut.*

Your

K. M.