---
id: MECW40-206
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, January 27, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "27 January 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 27 January 1859

Dear Moor,

I look forward keenly to your communication. Meanwhile herewith some bits of Paris gossip.

Yesterday I wrote to Freiligrath about Kinkel, the pretext being provided by the good fellow himself. I had written to him about the matter of the bill, adding a few comments on the political and economic aspects of the international situation, and this inspired him to declare: 'The *Hermann* will undoubtedly be followed one day by a *Neueste Rheinische Zeitung.'*[1] What led him to mention Kinkel's rag I cannot imagine, unless he hoped to induce me to speak my mind on the subject of Johann Gottfried,[2] in which case he was not disappointed. I must say that his attempt to establish some sort of connection between ourselves and that rotten little paper annoyed me very much. The day before yesterday I tried twice to write him a letter,[3] but it was too crude, I was too angry, so I left the thing over until yesterday. I treated *him* very decently, but Monsieur Gottfried with considerable asperity. I told him that Kinkel was exploiting him in order to establish his credentials as a poet, since his own literary fame, spuriously acquired as a result of his wife's importunate advertising, would not otherwise endure; that the *Hermann* had only served to increase the contempt I had always felt for this vacuous, affected, dandyish jackanapes, and that I'd not forgiven the 'cur' the dirty tricks which he had played on you and me in America and was too cowardly to admit.[4] It was a three page letter; as I said, Freiligrath can have no complaint about the way I treated *him* but, indirectly and by reading between the lines, he will learn a great deal. I'm curious to see what he will do.

I have had another visitor in the person of a Wuppertal poet and distant relation[5] of mine; in London he made straight for Freiligrath, of course, who wrote saying that he seemed to be a nice chap. I replied that he was at any rate robust, healthy and neither vain nor affected—qualities which, modern German poets

being what they are, made up for a comparative lack of talent. Freiligrath told this chap that his salary was a thousand pounds.

I was terribly annoyed at Freiligrath's surreptitious introduction of the *Hermann* into his letter, but he'll never play another trick of that kind on me, you may be sure of that.

Many regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

Just for a joke I enclose one of the rejected drafts of my letter to Freiligrath.