---
id: MECW40-276
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 13, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 August 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed a"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 13 August 1859

I received the enclosed note;[1] on Thursday afternoon. I therefore hastened into town. Matters could only be arranged by my borrowing £4 from Garthe, which *will have to be returned.* On Monday I shall write to Borchardt. To abandon the paper now would seem to me foolish on several counts: 1. because this would save the now foundering *Gottfried*[2] 2. because after the King of Prussia's[3] death there will be radical changes in Germany, when *we* must have a paper of our own; 3. because of the growing number of subscribers (although *for the time being* this is simply a disadvantage financially, since the cost in STAMPS increases weekly while payments aren't due until the *end of the quarter).* The *Volk* already wields considerable influence in the United States. For instance the preface to my book[4] has been reprinted from the

*Volk* and variously commented on by German papers from New England to California.

You couldn't, I suppose, arrange to let me have your article[5] by Wednesday, there being nothing 'topical' about it this time?

Might it be possible to raise some money from German business employees in Manchester through your cousin Siebel?

I shall certainly succeed in getting some money out of Berlin and New York. But there's the next 6 to 8 weeks to be taken care of.

As TO Freiligrath, just come and TRY extracting one shilling from him if you can!

Incidentally, and between ourselves, we'd have done better over money if new deficits hadn't continually arisen as a result of renewed thefts. But these were perpetrated by the old agents. Beginning with Scherzer, I've thrown out *all* those who *had* compromised themselves. But what remained of the old leaven[6]

wasn't any good and, even if these uncouth louts have been well-behaved hitherto, they blot their copybook when they make their *exit.* I finally threw out *the last* of them—Mr Lange—last week. It would have been relatively much easier to start up a completely new paper from scratch rather than, as Biskamp and

Liebknecht did, *continue,* if only nominally, the existence of an organ that was rotten through and through.[7]

Herewith a letter from Dana. Though I don't think much of his POETRY, could your RELATIVE Siebel do some little piece of verse for the *Volk?* But nothing sublime, please! So as to nettle Freiligrath, we simply must unearth some poet or other, even if we have to write the verse for him ourselves.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Copies of *Po and Rhine* next week.