---
id: MECW40-093
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 17, 1857"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "17 September 1857"
year: 1857
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN RYDE

[London,] 17 September[1] [1857]

Dear Engels,

**Bernadotte** is a difficult subject. The French generals who wrote under Louis Philippe are mostly his unqualified PARTISANS, just as the present writers under Boustrapa[2] are his unqualified opponents. The main points at issue upon which I should appreciate information from you are:

1. His part in the battle of Austerlitz[3] as a consequence of the manoeuvres he executed before the same.

2. His conduct at the batde of Jena;[4] and *before* the batüe of Eylau.[5]

3. His conduct at the battle of Wagram.[6]

As regards his embassy in Vienna, things were not quite as you present them.[7] It has been *shown* (by *inter alia* Schlosser, *Zur Beurtheilung Napoleons)* that the Bonapartist journals in Paris denounced Bernadotte as a royalist because he did *not* hang out the French flag. They drove him into taking the step which Bonaparte subsequently disavowed.

All in all, Bonaparte sensed that Bernadotte was the 'statesman' amongst his generals and one intent on pursuing his 'own plans'. He, and more notably his brothers, by their base and petty intrigues against Bernadotte, gave him greater prominence than he could otherwise have laid claim to.

Napoleon was, in general, beastly to anyone he suspected of 'self-seeking'.

Your

K. M.

*Blücher.* I'd like you to write something about his principal battles, his military qualities generally and, finally, the tactical merits upon which Griesheim lays so much stress.[8]

*Bessières, Brune, Brown, Bugeaud,* ditto. *Bosquet* in the Crimean campaign. Let me have Dana's list of B's as I have lost my copy.

Your

K. M.