---
id: MECW40-171
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, June 7, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 June 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 7 June 1858

DEAR Frederick,

Enclosed 2 Bangya numbers, ONE FOR YOU, THE OTHER FOR Lupus. Have received from you 1. letter with the POST OFFICE NOTE; 2. SECOND LETTER; 3. ARTICLE FOR THE TRIBUNE (VERY AMUSING ONE, TOO). Did not acknowledge receipt before because each day I was expecting the 2 Bangya numbers; also a lot of PRIVATE TROUBLES which took up my time.

Enclosed a letter from Lassalle.[1] It's an extremely odd business. I cannot reply until I have your own and Lupus' opinion. So I should like you to consult together at once and send me your *avis*[2] without delay. My own view is that Lassalle should not engage in a duel with that ass Fabrice and that, even from the standpoint of the duel, the assault by the two gentlemen from the 'High Court' has put any duelling OUT OF THE QUESTION. GENERALLY, it is my view—though having to decide whether or not the duel *as such* accords with *principle* seems to me ludicrous, OF COURSE—that in the PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES, AT THIS PARTICULAR JUNCTURE, etc., etc., in contemporary history, members of the revolutionary party may respond to their PRIVATE ENEMIES with clubs, kicks and punches, but not engage in duels. But it would seem to me totally wrong if, after he has come out so categorically against all duelling, Lassalle WOULD ALLOW HIMSELF TO BE BULLIED by feudal GOSSIP.

Schapper came to see me yesterday. Told me, *inter alia,* that friend Caussidière, arriving drunk in a disreputable alley in New York one evening, apparently attacked a wench with his stick; her yells attracted half a dozen LOAFERS who promptly set upon Caussidière and beat him almost to death. The fat lout was PICKED UP unconscious by the police early next morning and it was 6 weeks before he was fit enough to be up and about again.

Seiler had a CASE [attack] of paralysis; at death's door for 10 weeks; but weeds are indestructible. Heise is said to be dangerously ill again.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.