---
id: MECW40-078
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 11, 1857"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 July 1857"
year: 1857
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, Saturday, [11] July 1857[1]

Dear Marx,

It was only this morning that your short note was brought to me from the office. The WAREHOUSEMAN who generally brings me my mail thought it more convenient to run his errand the next morning instead of the previous night. I was deeply affected by the contents of your letter, cryptic though it was, knowing how

painful it must be for you to write like that. You yourself may be taking the child's death stoically, but hardly your wife. How *she* is, you don't say, and hence I assume that all is well, but let me know *for certain* or I shan't have a moment's peace of mind. In this respect, your mysterious insinuations leave too much room for conjecture. Providing she herself is well it is perhaps better that it should now all be over.

Today I can *definitely* promise you the manuscripts for Dana for Friday, i.e. the articles 'Alma', 'Abensberg', 'Adjutant', 'Ammuni- tion' and more such small stuff, thus pretty well finishing off the whole of A (except 'Algeria' and 'Afghanistan') up to Ap and Aq.[2]

I have got together the material for all this and should be able to work without interruption since, as a result of my breathing fresh air again, my illness has suddenly taken a turn for the better, which in all likelihood will finally put paid to the thing. This turn took place *last night* and, since I've been ordered to take exercise in the open air outside the town, I shall not be going to the office until Thursday. As soon as I've finished these first articles, I'll tackle 'Army' (modern times, 1300 to 1850) and 'Artillery'; the first part of 'Army' I shall do last and, at the same time, let you have the list of B's. 'Artillery' will be ready to go off on Friday week, 'Army' as well perhaps. I may send you some of the shorter things tomorrow for Tuesday's post.

A couple of days ago Lupus left for France and Switzerland. The French vice-consul here, a businessman, gave him a passport without further ado. On his return he will probably pay you a visit (in approx. 3 weeks).

I dare not show my face at the office, but as soon as I can put in an appearance there I shall send you some more money.

Give my warm regards to your wife and assure her of my sincerest sympathy. Love to the girls, and see that they keep in good health.

Your old friend,

F. E.