---
id: MECW40-213
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 9, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "9 February 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40, p. 384; First published: abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Moscow, "
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 9 February 1859**

Dear Engels,

At last a letter from Duncker *today.* He didn't receive the manuscript [*Contribution to Critique of Political Economy*] until 1 February. Not printed this week, because just completing some work or other — I don't know which — of Lassalle's.

Enclosed a letter from Eccarius and Pfänder from which you will see that poor Eccarius is down with consumption. This is the most tragic thing I have yet experienced here in London.

Pieper, who had been discharged as cured, is back from Bognor again and in the German hospital. This time starvation treatment. **Serves him right**.

I meant to send you the enclosed letters from Weydemeyer and Komp long ago. I have at last replied to them.

Dronke has been to Bonn, where one of his brothers was dying. Having obtained Flottwell's permission, he attended a ball given by his [students'] 'corps' in Bonn. The little man [Dronke] has written to Dingelstedt (*of Fulda*), through whom he hopes to arrange a performance of a *play* he himself has written. In addition, the little man writes 'Glasgower Briefe' for Prutz's *Museum*. I had all this news from philistine Freiligrath.

From the latter, who came to see me yesterday (I myself being confined to the house with a bad throat), I also learned that Gottfried's — or Hermann's — behaviour towards ladies is invariably so ludicrous (the buffoon now supposes he need only throw down his handkerchief) that he has become an object of general *dégoût.* Moreover, Freiligrath has now also tumbled to the fact that Gottfried feels exceptionally '**free and easy'** now that the Mockel woman is dead and — strangest of all — *it now transpires* that, even *before the day of the funeral*, philistine Freiligrath and wife had discovered brother Hermann's 'lack of concern'.

According to Gottfried, the *Hermann*, to which the Prussian government has, as the Berlin *National-Zeitung* announces, granted a licence for postal distribution, is to cover the '*loss*' to his funds occasioned by his wife's death.

In due course, no doubt, Mrs Daniels will become Mrs Bürgers. She has written to Lina saying that 'Bürgers has grown *still more* energetic and self-confident'. In proof of that 'self-confidence' she writes, 'we are delighted by Freiligrath's poem about Mrs Kinkel, which was mutilated by the "perfidious" *Kölnische Zeitung*'.

Steffen has written to Freiligrath asking for your address and mine as he has lost them. Steffen's address is: *W. Steffen, Harrison Square near Boston, Mass. U. St.*

*Salut*.

Your.
K. M.