---
id: MECW40-161
title: "Letter to Jenny Marx, April 14, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "14 April 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX[1]

IN LONDON

Manchester, 14 April 1858

Dear Mrs Marx,

I trust that Moor is at last on the road to recovery and will soon be able to return unhampered to his labours on political economy.[2] I was also plagued with toothache last week. By Sunday it had gone, only to return with added virulence this evening just as I was settling down to sort out some preliminary stuff on the conquest of Lucknow[3] for the *Tribune.* Whether I shall succeed in these circumstances seems very doubtful. At any rate I shall try and read up the subject this evening and if possible concoct something, even if not much, tomorrow midday while I'm at the office. But it would at any rate be a good idea if Moor were to have a *sujet in petto*[4] so that, if the worst comes to the worst, there's something to send the fellows.

I still find working in the evenings very tiring and, if I go on for too long or for two evenings running, I get over-excited and suffer from insomnia, particularly when I've had a lot of writing to do during the day. And I also feel very stupid and lethargic in the evenings until I wake myself up by forcing myself to concentrate on some subject. My memory is better on the whole, although every day I still find that things I have done or heard the day before vanish so completely from my mind that they might never have happened, and it's only when I've been reminded of *individual details* that it all comes back to me. Otherwise I am physically strong and healthy again, able to stand up to strains and stresses and—*sauf le*[5] * TOOTHACHE—to any kind of weather.*

Lupus is still very lame and is having to spend more on CABS in one week than he usually does in a year. But he is improving visibly and in a week's time he'll probably again be able to stand a certain amount of walking. He sends everyone his best wishes.

How do you like the Bernard trial?[6] The French *mouchards*[7] and their worthy *confrère* MR Rogers are cutting a pretty figure.

Yesterday's *Morning Post* drew a very nice picture of the trial's physiognomy. That Chevalier Estien was excellendy portrayed.[8]

I have today received from DEAR Harney 3 more *Independent*[9] from which it transpires that his arch-enemy, Seigneur Godfrey, has begun a fresh libel suit against him.[10] The man will soon be thinking himself as 'greet' as the 'greet'[11] Lassalle.

'OUR FAITHFUL ALLY"[12] is now weighing on English commerce like a nightmare. Nobody wants to speculate or buy more than his immediate requirements because the whole of Philistia is expecting war, revolution or even more oudandish things in France.

Very best wishes to the girls and Moor,

Yours ever,

F. Engels