---
id: MECW40-258
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, June 1, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "1 June 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed a"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 1 June 1859

Dear Engels,

Enclosed 1 copy of the *Presse* containing some particulars that may be of interest to you. No answer from that fellow, Friedländer,[1] needless to say. However, my present explanation for this is as follows: When he lectured Friedländer about bias,[2]

Lassalle did so, OF COURSE, not only in his but also in my name. Friedländer believes that I am hand in glove with Heraclitus the Dark Philosopher.[3] So he naturally can't imagine that under PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES I can write for a Viennese paper. Every day the Vienna *Presse* contains veiled attacks upon the Berlin wiseacre. Thus, for instance, in a leading article on 29 May:

'But how can one demand a sense of national self-respect of those speculative minds which see in Napoleon III the avenging arm of history and, in his alleged genius for liberating the peoples, complacently admire the reflection of the ineptitude, pedantry and aridity of their own categorising intellects.'

The very insistence with which Lassalle required of me not to write any more to his cousin[4] is evidence that the fellow carried on his intrigues *in my name also.* Thus the blockhead has frustrated the best prospect I had for the summer. Besides, in certain eventualities it would be a good thing if I had some say in the Vienna *Presse.*

When you next write about Garibaldi, WHATEVER MAY BE HIS FATE, crack a joke about the curious position in which only 'his uncle's nephew'[5] could have found himself, namely that beside him the leader of the volunteer corps figures as a HERO. Can you imagine anything of the kind happening under the old Napoleon? By the by, in today's *Times* the Paris correspondent writes that the Bonapartists are already GRUMBLING loudly about Garibaldi's 'fame', and that A FEW SELECT POLICE have been smuggled into his corps and send in detailed reports about him.[6] Adhering strictly to Mazzini's instructions, Garibaldi *omitted* all mention of Bonaparte in his proclamation.[7] Mazzini's latest thing[8] is not, by the by, as good as

I thought. I had only run my eye over some excerpts. His old complaints about socialism. *We* can do nothing with him direct. But he could with advantage be used as an authority against Kossuth, etc. By the by, in his last number,[9] which I shall send you at the end of this week, you will reacquaint yourself with Mr Karl Blind's importance.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Incidentally, Blind is no longer with the *Hermann,* but is greatly mistaken if he's hoping to get onto the *Volk.* Feeble though the little sheet may be, it has made the entire emigration down here froth at the mouth with rage. Among others Tausenau and Co., who are paid by Kossuth-Bonaparte to form German OPINION' in London.