---
id: MECW40-280
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Liebknecht, September 17, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "17 September 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow 1946. Printed according to the original. Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, "
status: raw
---

MARX TO WILHELM LIEBKNECHT

IN LONDON

London, 17 September 1859

Dear Liebknecht,

I should ere now have returned Blind's letter of 8th Sep- tember,[1] which you passed on to me, had not various passages therein made it *necessary* for me to take further steps to ascertain the facts of the case.

In this letter Blind maintains that he had had **nothing whatever to do with the problem in question'* (i.e. with the *public* denunciation of Vogt). He further maintains that 'the remarks' he made ****in the course of a private conversation...***[2] * (implying that he's only spoken about Vogt ****in private') 'were completely misinterpreted'.* The words

'completely misinterpreted' are used with reference to *myself.* It was J who **completely misinterpreted'* Blind's 'remarks made in the course of a *private conversation** and hence **completely misrepresented** them to you and Biskamp. The misrepresentation in question is not *witting, deliberate* misrepresentation, but misrepresentation due either to the inherent difficulty of Blind's account, or to the feebleness and natural perversity of my powers of comprehension. As to which I would observe:

1. Vogt was a tool used by Bonaparte to corrupt liberals in Germany and German revolutionaries abroad. Vogt further offered 30,000 gulden to a certain liberal writer in Germany in order to win him over in the interests of Bonapartist propagan- da.—These two *on-dit*[3] were imparted to *me* IN THE MOST SERIOUS MANNER by Blind on 9 May, the day of Urquhart's first meeting. He imparted them to Freiligrath. He imparted them to *others.* He repeated, or rather *reaffirmed,* them in your presence, in Holling- er's presence, in my presence, on the day we all three of us had AN INTERVIEW with him. In regard to these two points, therefore, there can be no question of any interpretation, false or otherwise. They have been admitted. They can be proved by evidence. They are FACTS in so far as we consider Blind's *statements* as *FACTS.*

2. Now as to Blind's **interpretation'—* minus the *name* Vogt *qua* agent of Bonapartist corruption, and minus the affair of the 30,000 gulden—it is to be found in an article in the London *Free Press* dated 27 May with the heading: 'The Grand Duke Constantine to be King of Hungary'.[4] Blind *is* the author of this article in which he says that **he* 'knows the name of a Swiss Senator to whom he (Prince Jerome Napoleon) broached the subject'*, and even knows what Plon-Plon DID BROACH TO THE Swiss SENATOR; in which he further * knows of 'the attempts made... to win over to the Russo-Napoleonic scheme some of the exiled German Democrats, as well as some influential Liberals in Germany'*; in which he further KNOWS that *****large pecuniary advantages* were held out to them as a *bribe'*;* and in which, finally, he is * 'glad that these offers were rejected with indigna- tion' *. This 'interpretation' is *printed* and did not therefore occur 'in the course of a *private conversation'.* Again, it would seem from this that Blind, far from having had nothing to do with 'the problem', played the part of initiator.

3. Add together 1. the *facts* related, and admitted to have been related, by Blind and 2. the 'interpretation' which Blind had

printed and which is *legally verifiable* as such, and what do you get?

The anonymous pamphlet *Zur Warnung* minus a few irrelevant phrases. Whether or not Blind composed this pamphlet is therefore *completely immaterial.* He is *responsible for publishing* the elements which go to make it up.

He mentioned the *name* Vogt and the affair of the 30,000 gulden 'in the course of a private conversation'. Not only with me but with Freiligrath and others. And not as a private and **confidential** matter but as political denunciation. He *himself* had the 'interpretation' relating to these two POINTS printed.

It is quite immaterial, therefore, whether or not the pamphlet which subsequently came out was composed by him! All it contains is the sum total of verbal Blind and printed Blind. It *is* Blind added together. Hence it was not only / who regarded him as its author. Freiligrath did too. He even questioned him about it.

Author or otherwise, it in *no way* alters the case. He is still the *instigator* responsible.

You will recall that at the above-mentioned meeting he stated on his *word of honour* that he had not *composed* the pamphlet. *Composing* and *writing* are in effect two separate things. I now have *documentary, legally valid* evidence *(which is at your disposal)* to the effect that the pamphlet was printed by F. Hollinger, was handed to him by Blind, was written in Blind's *hand,* and was regarded by F. Hollinger as Blind's product.[5]

What remains, then, is *my* interpretation, described not merely as a 'misinterpretation' but a 'complete misinterpretation'.

As regards the Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung,* the relationship between myself and that paper has always been one of outright *hostility.* What is at issue in the law-suit that is to be heard in open court at Augsburg on the 28th of October[6] is not a QUARREL between the A. *A. Z.* and Vogt but a *legal ruling* on the relationship between the German ex-imperial regent[7] Vogt and the French EMPEROR Louis Bonaparte. In my view, then, what is at issue for *every* German revolutionary, even if not a member of a 'Fatherland Association',[8] is *not,* in this instance, 'the affairs of a newspaper with which he had *nothing whatever* to do'; rather it is *his own* affair. That, however, is a matter of taste. *De gustibus,* etc.[9]

*Salut.* Y o u r

K. M.