---
id: MECW40-139
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, February 8, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "8 February 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 8 February 1858

Dear Moor,

At times last week I wasn't well. There would seem to be some slight vestige of my former complaint which, though too mild to take a serious hold, plagues me with all kinds of little miseries—a peculiarly sensitive skin, cuts slow to heal, abscesses on the fingers, and similar boring and idiotic things. Fortunately there is no longer any sign at all of septic glands, so I have nothing to fear on that score. These little miseries crop up whenever I have a cold, and will doubtless continue to bother me off and on until I go to bathe in the sea again. Pending that I shall, at any rate, have to be careful. My piles, by the way, which have become something of a problem since I got back, act as a diversion; this may help at the time, but makes sitting impossible for the next day or two, except on horseback. Hence my silence last week and the dearth of contributions since Monday. Most evenings I could only *lie down.* However my cold is now SUBSIDING—so much so that yesterday I was again able to ride 28 miles, which means we shall be able to pitch in again tomorrow.

*Au fond*[1] Mr Lassalle doesn't seem to have taken much trouble over the dark Heraclitus. Lupus was much amused by your description of his method; it gave him some satisfaction to learn that Greek scholarship is not this gentleman's forte. When the book[2] arrives I shall let him study it.

Today friend Belfield again presented himself for election to the city council and suffered a resounding defeat. 196 votes against 143 in his favour.

I still have a few *Guardians* at home with some nice reports from Paris and shall send them to you in the next few days.

Warm regards to the FAMILY. There'll be some more *Cyclopaedia* stuff for Friday.

Your

F. E.