---
id: MECW40-239
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 16, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "16 April 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Publish"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 16 April [1859]

Dear Engels,

I trust that by the time you get this note your toothache will have gone. It's a fiendish thing.

MEANWHILE I have made arrangements which, within a short time, will double my income and thus put an end to the habitual misery. Friedländer, Lassalle's cousin (sometime editor along with Eisner and Co. of the *Neue Oder-Zeitung),* present editor of the *Presse* in Vienna (which, *en passant,* has 24,000 subscribers), offered, in January 1858, to appoint me correspondent to his paper.[1] I turned this down at the time because he stipulated that only Bonaparte, not Palmerston, be attacked. Now he has renewed the offer, *ALL CONDITIONS LAID AsiDF.* Since, however, this will *as a rule* involve only 1 article (20 frs) per week, it is comparatively unimportant. But I am at the same time to be their despatcher of telegrams (in French), 10 frs per telegram, and this, though time-consuming, is lucrative.

The only point that remains to be settled is that of instructions to a banking house in London, since telegraphing necessitates considerable expenditure. Negotiations—before the terms were SETTLED—extended over 3 weeks. It was only yesterday that I sent a definite answer to a letter received the same day from Vienna. So it will be 8-10 days before the thing gets under way.

MEANWHILE the interest on our most valuable silver, watches, etc., is due for payment next Tuesday. By private TRANSACTIONS with the PAWNBROKER my wife has already put off the date of foreclosure for 3 weeks, but Tuesday is the *ultimus terminus.* So my request that you send m e a few pounds goes hand in hand with the hope that this will definitely be the last time and the tax upon you will cease for good.

Be so kind as to send 1 copy[2] for me. As soon as you are in possession of several, Freiligrath and Pfänder ought each to have one.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.