---
id: MECW40-105
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, October 31, 1857"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "31 October 1857"
year: 1857
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40, p. 197; First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in St Hélier in Jersey*

**[London,] 31 October 1857**

**Dear** Frederic,

Have received two letters from Dana. Says first, that '*Army'* arrived in good time. *Secondly*, that, because of the **commercial crisis**, notice has been given to all European correspondents except for myself and Bayard Taylor; 1, however, am to confine myself **strictly to 1 article per week —** lately I had been trying to break through this limitation — and for the time being write exclusively about the **Indian war** and the **financial crisis**.

If you could let me have the **History of Cannon** by Friday, **it would be a great boon**. As soon as the next mail arrives from India, you must write to me at some length about the Delhi affair or rather, **if possible**, do the whole article since this time it has to be purely technical.

I sent the chaps **about 8** sheets under the heading 'Blücher', the same being sub-titled '**The Silesian army in the campaigns etc.'** As I had to spend so much time reading Clausewitz, Müffling, etc., some degree of compensation was called for.

So far as your resolution as to Manchester is concerned, it seems to me **quite rational**, within Heckscher's **limitations**. Allen, too, says that fatal consequences are likely to result only if the lung is affected but that, in the early days after such a business, it behoves anyone to take care of himself.

The doses of iron may have been somewhat too strong. At all events it should have an excellent effect on your **body**. The weather here has improved during the past few days.

**I should much like, old boy, to see you before your return to Manchester**. There is a certain irony of fate in my being personally embroiled in these damned crises. What **satisfaction** it would give Heinzen *s'il le savait* [if he knew]!

The news **as to** Schramm is no less saddening for being predictable. What do you say to Cavaignac's **death** and the idiocy of our liege-lord?

With warm regards from the **whole family**.

Your
K. M.