---
id: MECW40-190
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 10, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 November 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 November 1858

DEAR Frederick,

For the past 10 days I have had the most appalling toothache and ulcers all over my mouth, i.e. inflammation of the gums, etc. HENCE IN VERY BAD HUMOUR, these having come on top of all my other troubles.

Your article[1] went off yesterday *as of Friday,* since I had sent nothing on that day. I myself wrote about the new Prussian ministry. Have now sent about six articles on Prussia dated Berlin to the *Tribune*.[2] So I don't imagine that you will be able to have ANY NEW MATTER concerning Prussia for next Tuesday. One subject that might be worth writing about, though in this case I fear our COMMON MATERIAL GOES NOT VERY FAR, would be the growth of industry in Prussia over the last 10 years. But WHENCE obtain the 'material'? As regards Japan I imagine the Yankees know more about it than we do, though in fact their knowledge is always exceedingly superficial. Those engaged in high politics (e.g. Mr Pulszky in the *Tribune)*) are blathering away about a possible war in Italy between Austria on the one hand and Bonaparte and Piedmont on the other. I regard all that as nonsense. Might it not, on the whole, be a good idea to say something sensible for once about Bonaparte's *military* position vis-à-vis Germany generally? If you don't like that topic, do something on France, say, or Russia, or ANYTHING ELSE.

I had forgotten to enclose Blind's 'pamphlets'.[3] Unfortunately I can't lay my hands on the most idiotic one, *Aufruf an Schleswig-Holstein*—yes, here it is at last. In addition I am sending you a speech by that clown Edgar Bauer[4] from the London *Neue Zeit.* Keep the things.

Next week I have to pay more than one pound interest at the pawnshop. As it's impossible for me to draw on the *Tribune* just now, I'd be grateful if you would send me the pound.

Mind you write and tell me your opinion of Mr E. Bauer's 'Philosophy of History'.

*Salut.* Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.