---
id: MECW40-204
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Freiligrath, January 25, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 January 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH[1]

IN LONDON

[Draft]

Manchester, 25 January 1859

Dear Freiligrath,

The bloody boy who was to have got the POST OFFICE ORDER yesterday idled away the time instead, which is why the 22/- will only arrive today. Many thanks for your trouble and for the outlay.

As to the *Neueste Rheinische Zeitung,* due provision has been made, never fear. We have in the meanwhile learnt a great deal and forgotten nothing,)[2] and that's more than the others can say. Of this you could find no better illustration than the *Hermann* (clearly a misprint for *Gottfried,* otherwise the title's meaningless[3], which you recently described as the *Rheinische Zeitung's* John the Baptist. It's a long time since I've read rubbish as insipid, namby-pamby, tail-wagging, lavish of compliments, conciliatory, propitiatory and atrociously written as is found in this, the latest product of the pseudo-noble sometime *Maikäfer*[4] which, to judge by its style and content, is aimed solely at and tailored to the tastes of the Cambeiwell philistines and the German ditto in the City. The man has even forgotten what little he managed to pick up in 1848 and has become a real bourgeois windbag. Now, since it was you who brought up the topic of this cheery customer,

presently touting round his 'grief, I will not conceal from you the fact that I have recently been asked by various philistines how it is that you have formed such a bond of friendship with Monsieur Kinkel. T h o u g h an exaggeration, this placed me, as you can imagine, in something of a quandary. Needless to say, I attributed it largely to the malicious exaggeration with which Kinkel and clique had seized on what was a mere encounter with you and blazoned it in all the papers as an offensive and defensive alliance—directed against us—and this I roundly denied. As for your social intercourse with the worthy citizen, all I could do was crack bad jokes, such as that, since poets live in a world apart,

Kinkel could only pass himself off as a poet by citing his intercourse with you, etc. Suffice it to say that, although a poor diplomat, I succeeded well enough in defending the party's position. Moreover, it eventually transpired that one of the Jewish females who patronised the gentle Gottfried when he was last u p here, had said: 'Ah, just let Kinkel, the naughty man, visit Manchester again—he seduced a girl of good family in London and keeps her as his mistress, and that's the reason why his wife....'[5]