---
id: MECW40-252
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 24, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 May 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 24 May 1859

Dear Engels,

If you could possibly let me have some 'TIN', you would *greatly* oblige me. That wretched Duncker, whom I had been counting on, appears to be putting the thing[2] off *ad infinitum.* Once again 11 days have gone by without my receiving anything from the dolt. Who do you think it is STOPS MY WAY? None other than Lassalle. First, my thing was held up for 4 weeks on account of his *Sickingen.* Now that it is nearing its conclusion, the fool must needs cut in yet again with his 'anonymous' pamphlet,[3] which he only wrote because your own 'anonymous' pamphlet[4] gave him no respite. Can't the scoundrel see that decency, if nothing else, demands that my thing be brought out first? I shall wait a day or two, but after that write a really filthy letter to Berlin.

I have seen to your orders for Manchester. If you can possibly find the time tomorrow, write 20-30-40 lines for me in German on the subject of the war; I shall pass them on to Dishrag Liebknecht, not in your writing but by dictating them. There is no time to be lost since the *Volk* boasts only *one* type-setter and everything has to be ready by the morning of each Friday.

*A point not to be overlooked.* With something more original from the theatre of war we ought TO CATCH at least 50 more customers in London.[5] I shall MANAGE the thing in such a way that initially you and I are not directly responsible.

You will be able to judge Gottfried's[6] manoeuvres from the fact that last week in the East End the parson was selling his *Hermann* to the Whitechapel[7] public for a HALFPENNY, solely in order to stop the sale of the *Volk.* But where did the *fonds*[8] come from? Schapper tells me that *Willich* has been over here. In which case the fellows must have shared out the money and flung the small change to watchdog Heinzen, for the dog has ceased to bark. We shall get to the bottom of it.

As regards the business of publishing our manifesto[9] I SHALL LOOK

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Imandt is marrying his landlady's daughter, a Scotswoman. A nice district, too.[10]