---
id: MECW40-224
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 3, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "3 March 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Publish"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 March 1859

Dear Engels,

From the enclosed letter of Lassalle's[1] you will see that I know my men and what MANAGEMENT means.

As regards the letter, I would make the following observations:

1. You must now really follow my advice and *shun the office altogether for a few days.* I did, of course, put the thing in such a way as to suggest that I'd already read your manuscript.[2] A few days here or there are of no importance, but if you only work in the evenings you won't finish *in time.*

2. In your position you cannot agree to the small fee but must, if only *honoris causa,* settle for the alternative of half the net profits.

3. Lassalle's direction that you send the *title* (i.e. *not* write it on the manuscript), the foreword (which I'd suggest you don't write) and the table of contents to him personally (F. Lassalle, 131 Potsdamer Strasse, Berlin), is a sensible one. For parcels are being opened by the Post Office, and the government mustn't know the title, which would give them the key to the whole secret.

The manuscript, on the other hand, I shall send from here, as I sent my own manuscript[3] (i.e. insured), to Duncker *via* Fräulein Ludmilla Assing. Only I'll get *Pfänder* to put himself down as the sender.

4. You should indeed include something national, anti- Bonapartist, but the tone should be careful and gentlemanly. You can the more readily employ this colour in that the intention of your pamphlet is, IN FACT, a great victory for Mazzini vis-à-vis the National Assembly of 1848 (Radowitz[4] -Mincio),[5] and you enable Germans for the first time to interest themselves with a good conscience in Italy's emancipation.

N o w, GOOD-BYE, OLD BOY.

Your K. M.

In his latest *Gottfried* Mr Gottfried[6] kow-tows to Suse-Sibeth, whom he describes as a model merchanting house, likewise to that wretched publisher, Trübner, who has compiled a worthless American bibliography.[7] *Macte puer virtute.*[8]