---
id: MECW40-229
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Lassalle, March 16, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "16 March 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in *F. Lassalle. Nachgelassene Briefe und Schriften*, Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN BERLIN

London, 16 March 1859

9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

Your latest work[1] and accompanying letter have not yet arrived, nor are they to be here so soon. Despatch through publisher's channels is about as expeditious as if you were to send me the things via Petersburg, Kamchatka and North America.

If it's not too late, get them to print 'THE RIGHT OF TRANSLATION IS RESERVED' on the last manuscript I sent you. Otherwise some of the German clowns over here might massacre the thing.

Owing to circumstances which I can't go into today (for I am dictating an article in English[2] while writing this note to you), I am very hard pressed for money. Might it be possible for you to carry out some sort of bill transaction for me in Berlin having a currency of a few weeks, in return for which you could subsequently take the fee Duncker owes me?

Yesterday I had a visitor from Paris, a man by whose judgment I set tremendous store. Speaking of war,[3] he said: *Il n'y a pas deux opinions à Paris. Nous avons la guerre.*[4] He was quite convinced that, were Bonaparte to draw back, he would crack up and, LIKE the *Empereur* Soulouque, would be betrayed by the army itself. Even the Parisian bourgeois, though rabid for peace, are already beginning to mutter that the fellow has no more courage than Louis Philippe.

There's one factor, by the by, which you must not overlook; Russia is stirring up the whole thing, and her ally, Palmerston (you only have to look at *The Times*) is doing all he can to drive Bonaparte to war. On top of that there'll soon be a change of ministry here, and then Palmerston will run the thing direct.[5]

The pro-Poerio, etc., demonstrations here are wholly inspired by him. He has placed his son-in-law, Lord Shaftesbury, at the head of these, AS RESPONSIBLE EDITOR.

I am now, AFTER ALL, beginning to believe that the war might hold out some prospects for us as well.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Don't forget, by the by, that if you write to me about certain conditions,[6] it will benefit a vast public, amongst whom a great many Germans. The *Tribune* numbers some 200,000 regular subscribers.