---
id: MECW40-238
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 12, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "12 April 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 12 April 1859

Dear Engels,

Yesterday Lassalle wrote to me about your pamphlet[1] as follows:

'Engels' pamphlet came out 3 days ago. Today I am sending him two copies by book post, as I shall do each day for 6 days in succession. For this is the only way we could devise' (!) 'of *avoiding* heavy postal charges on the one hand and, on the other, *preventing certain persons from guessing who was the pamphlet's author.* Write and tell him this.'[2]

Have you ever known such tomfoolery? To *distract* attention from you, they send you copies by book post '6 days in succession'!

Of the thing itself Lassalle writes:

'The pamphlet is truly impressive by reason of the pungency and sterling quality of the strategic knowledge evinced therein.'

(The 'pungency' of 'knowledge' may be regarded as a *lapsus pennae*)

As to my own affair,[3] Lassalle writes:

'Duncker tells me that the instalments will be ready by mid-May.'

(So that's another month's delay.)

'He maintains he is getting on with the printing as quickly as he can. At any rate you are *utterly* wrong in supposing that he is deliberately dragging his feet. He's always rather slow.'

What I *do* know, however, is that another 10 days have gone by without my getting a proof-sheet.

Apropos. The *Neue Zeit* is on its last legs. Mr Edgar, who actually ended up by gracing its columns with a short story of his own contriving,[4] resigned a week ago—realising that the world was thoroughly unamenable to his genius. Last Saturday[5] it came out as a half number, and this week will probably see the end of it. The *Hermann,* too, according to current rumour, will soon depart this life. A good thing the curs snatched so eagerly at the opportunity of thus shamelessly laying bare their nonentity before all the world. Kinkel has KILLED the Kinkel humbug with his own hand. The CLOWN,[6] for his part, has found out just how 'easy' it is to take our place in communist literature.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

You explained the Austrian plan of attack in the *Tribune* just as you describe it.

*Pas trop de zèle!*[7]