---
id: MECW40-143
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, February 18, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "18 February 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

142

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 18 February 1858

Dear Moor,

Every day this week I have meant to write to you, and every day the steady rise in prices has stopped me from doing so. You will remember my telling you[1] that 6d for Middling Orleans was the highest price compatible with FULL TIME. NOW, with Middling Orleans at 5^3/4d, 7/8 of all spinners have gone on to FULL TIME, and the result of this asininity is that, out of sheer impatience, they've pushed Middling Orleans up to *7*^1/4d in 6 weeks! Yarn and cloth haven't followed in the same proportion, of course; the manufac- turer's MARGIN between the price of his raw material and the finished product has been reduced to below cost price and now the asses want to revert to SHORT TIME, which they ought never to have abandoned!

The *Guardians* will go off today at the same time.

I trust that your bill has been honoured. Since you had in any case advised them so long in advance, they should certainly have told you long ago had there been any intention of returning it.

Enclosed another little thing for Dana.[2] If the fellow wants to lay down the law on the strength of his paltry 2 dollars, then he deserves some rough words. At all events he can't expect more than we are already providing—largely original work instead of the measly compilations he is getting from elsewhere. Urge him to pay better and *que puis nous verrions.*[3] As regards Badajos,[4] the wretched *Brockhaus*[5] really led me astray.

'Burmah' is A VERY LABORIOUS ARTICLE. Could you not take over 'Bülow' and 'Beresford'? Up here even the bare bones of the biographies are lacking, but I could let you have the chief points on the military side.

I shall discuss equitation another time. *Au fond*[6] the thing is the material basis for all my military studies, as you know. The *crapauds*[7] regard the sordid Bonaparte as a hero because he sits elegantly on a horse though only a passable rider; there are plenty of witnesses over here who know that he is A VERY INDIFFERENT FENCER and that he shirks many an obstacle which YOUR HUMBLE SERVANT would tackle without a second thought. Moreover riding is the only physical accomplishment in which I have acquired a modicum of competence and anyway the element of danger in hunting and jumping is so small (probability 1:10,000) that it has an irresistible attraction. Anyway, sois *tranquille,*[8] if I break my neck it won't be by falling off a horse. Warm regards to all the FAMILY.

Your

F. E.