---
id: MECW40-312
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Freiligrath, about November 30, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "30 November 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in *Die Neue Zeit,* Ergänzungshefte, No. 12, 1911-1912 Printed according to the manuscript of Marx's letter to Engels of 10 December 1859 Published in English for the first time in Mar"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

IN LONDON

[London, about 30 November 1859]

Dear Freiligrath,

I am neither Liebknecht's letter-writer, nor his ATTORNEY. I shall, however, send him a copy of that part of your letter which relates to him.

I have decided against the statement I had briefly envisaged, bearing in mind that *odi profanum vulgus et arceo*.[1] While the statement was certainly *against* Beta, it was for that very reason bound to be also *about* you, as you will have seen from the SUMMARY. If only for that reason, I gave you notice of it, quite apart from the intimacy in which your family and his appear in his *opusculum*.[2]

You find it unpleasant to have your name mixed u p in the Vogt affair. I don't give a d a m n for Vogt and his infamous lies in the Biel *Handels-Courier*[3] but I will not have my name used as a mask by democratic tricksters. As you know, if someone is forced to call upon witnesses, no other person can 'object' to being cited as a witness. In accordance with ancient English legal USE, RESTIVE WITNESSES may, *horribile dictu*,[4] actually be crushed to death.

Finally, as regards party considerations, I am used to being treated on behalf of the whole party as target for mud-slinging by the press, and to seeing my private interests constandy damaged by party considerations; on the other hand, I am equally used to being unable to reckon on any kind of private consideration towards myself.

*Salut*

Your

K. M.