---
id: MECW40-251
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, May 23, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "23 May 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 23 May 1859

Dear Moor,

I entirely agree about the manifesto.[1] What ought we to do about printing it? It will probably have to be printed in London; make some inquiries about costs and other PARTICULARS SO that we can launch it immediately it's been written.[2]

The *Völkchen*[3] business is very amusing, very satisfactory, and may turn out to be extremely useful.[4] As regards its distribution here, the following should be noted: While I could easily find an English 'STATIONER', he would never stand a chance of catching even a STRAY subscriber. To get hold of them we must have recourse to the FOREIGN BOOKSELLERS here, Dunnill and Palmer, Princess Street, and Franz Thimm, Princess Street. Lupus is taking out a subscription with Dunnill and Palmer, Gumpert and I with Thimm, who is our bookseller. The *Hermann* is very much on the wane here and there is a whole load of back-numbers; Thimm's manager, who doesn't seem overfond of Kinkel, tells me that the

subscribers get fewer every week. So send Thimm a dozen copies of the early numbers, particularly the one dealing with the Kinkel affair,[5] and another half-dozen or so to Dunnill and Palmer; as soon as it appears I shall set that chatterbox Heckscher in motion and he will start the thing circulating here as sure as 2x2=4. But the stuff for Thimm must be sent *direct* to the Thimm up here; the London chap would be perfectly capable of intercepting the things. Then, as soon as Thimm gets subscriptions here, the local salesmen will perhaps take a greater interest in the matter.

I shall deal with the battle of Casteggio next Friday; the affair is too insignificant to warrant 2 articles and the telegrams are too vague to permit of anything worthwhile being said about it.[6] Your old map of Lombardy has stood me in very good stead, the scale being approx. 1/160,000, hence quite large. Unfortunately the delineation of the ground is very poor.

Many regards,

Your

F. E.