---
id: MECW40-151
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 11, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 March 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsei zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 11 March 1858

Dear Moor,

Herewith something on 'Beresford' which I've been able to abstract from Napier.[1] I couldn't find anything about his expedition to Buenos Aires at the beginning of the century, but it was a glorious one and would be worth investigating. He capitulated, RUMP AND STUMP, with the whole English force.[2]

'Bülow' is IN HAND. Ditto 'Cavalry'. Still some particulars to be looked up on 'Bomarsund'. In India there's another article brewing for which I shall be on the *qui vive.*

Charras' *Campagne de 1815* is no longer obtainable in Brussels; said to be out of print and with no definite prospect of a reprint. In other words, Bonaparte has bought the publisher.[3] If you can run to ground a cheap (i. e. not exorbitant) copy in London, I'd like you to let me know; just now I'm studying this campaign.

I suspect that friend Dana is abridging our articles considerably, otherwise you couldn't possibly have miscalculated so badly. Go to Trübner's some time and have a look at the *Cyclopaedia.*

No news here, except that it's a ghastly winter; the weather changes I don't know how many times a day. Health very good. Am also taking iron.

Warm regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

A bundle of *Guardians* goes off today. As often as not there's nothing from their foreign correspondents just now. In today's more statistics on the UNEMPLOYED.[4]