---
id: MECW40-268
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 19, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "19 July 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Publish"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 19 July 1859

DEAR Frederick,

I would gladly have written the article on the peace, for it would simply have meant combining last Friday's and today's articles for the *Tribune.*[1] They were, moreover, good articles, for *ira facit poetam.*[2]

However, as Biskamp has *begun* the thing, has already *announced* No. II,[3] and is effectively, or at least nominally, in command, *decency* precludes one interfering in this way. Once he is in Edmonton, his very remoteness will ensure that at crucial moments such as this the

*LEADER* can be taken out of his hands without hurt to his *amour propre*—which is all he gets out of it.

But what the two of us *can* do to put some stiffening into the next issue, is support him on his left and right flanks. On the pretext of discussing Urquhart's document,[4] I shall briefly sum up Russia's PART in this tragi-comedy and at the same time disparage Bonaparte.[5] You, on the pretext of writing a final article on military affairs,[6] must also set about Bonaparte, etc. (and on the same occasion take a swipe at Prussia). In my view it is of the utmost importance *morally* that a belief in Bonaparte's greatness should not be allowed to *arise* among the Germans. As for Austria, the agreed LINE we have adopted of blaming everything on the sovereign[7] is SUFFICIENT.

*Ad vocem*[8] the *document.* Fell into the hands of the 'Prince of Prussia'[9] during the regency crisis on the occasion of Manteuffel's sudden removal.[10] More than that is not to be coaxed out of Urquhart's idiots. Certain passages have been *forged* because they didn't get hold of the *complete document.*[11] The *authenticity* of the whole is vouched for by the style peculiar to all, even 'secret', Russian documents, in which certain stereotyped, conventional untruths take turn and turn about. It is a LINE even Pozzo di Borgo adopts in his writing. The plain truth about Russia's machinations comes to light only with the chance publication of the documents of Russian agents not in the direct employ of the Russian state. E.g. Theyls' (a Dutchman) and Patkul's (came out in Berlin in 1796) memoirs and correspondence.[12]

*Portfolio.* I shall obtain for you (and myself) from Paris the complete edition published there of the PAPERS of which the *Portfolio* was allowed to contain only those authorised by Palmer- ston.

*Volk.* Agents' remuneration reduced to ½*d.* Expenditure has been heavy because Biskamp required personal sustenance; because the rows the fellows were having with each other during my absence[13] meant that the administration was at sixes and sevens; because the entire staff has been changed since my return. By the end of the week I shall have a *full statement of accounts.* This involves a great deal of work in view of the way the thing has been run hitherto. £4-£5 worth of advertising will have to be obtained this week in order to liquidate the debt to Hollinger for Nos 9 and 10.

Biskamp wanted to write a short review of my *Critique of Political Economy,* etc. I dissuaded him, for he knows nothing about the subject. But since he has undertaken (in the *Volk)* to say something about it, I should like you to do it for him[14] (say next week, but not this). Briefly on the method and what is new in the content. In this way you would set the tone for the correspondents down here. And likewise help frustrate Lassalle's plan to KILL me.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.