---
id: MECW40-289
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, October 3, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 October 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 3 October 1859

Dear Moor,

What you wrote and told me about *Das Volk* was most welcome news. It now transpires that the philistine who raised an outcry had taken out a subscription with Thimm *après tout.*[1]

What's this about proceedings in the COUNTY COURT?[2]

Because of sundry interruptions and an (otherwise insignificant) inflammation of the left eye which prevents me doing much writing by gas-light, 'Infantry' is not quite finished. You'll get it by Friday for sure.

My quarrel not settled yet and might still be damnably long-drawn-out. But I've got the scoundrel[3] pretty well pinned down and believe I can now stand back and watch; whatever happens, though, it's going to cost money—that's the most annoying thing about it; moreover, the LAW being what it is here, one can never be quite sure of one's case. At all events, things look a good deal better now.

*The Free Press* hadn't arrived the day before yesterday; I shall go and have another look presently. What sort of a branch is it that Urquhart has opened in Berlin?

So it now transpires that the Russian memorandum appeared in the *Preussisches Wochenblatt* (I've only just seen the August number of *The Free Press.*)?[4] Apart from what's in *The Free Press,* have you any other scandalous stuff about great men[5]

Your

F. E.

Have a complete account made out for Thimm as soon as possible, i.e. covering the pre-Lessner period as well; the fellow apparently intends to pocket the money. But send me a full list of the people who subscribed through Thimm, so that I can keep a check on reimbursements and send round a circular telling people that they can reclaim their money from Thimm.

Siebel's indifferent verse[6] was sent to the *Hermann* behind Siebel's back by a chap in Germany to whom he had written enclosing it. He promptly wrote to the editors, and only then did he learn how this had come about.