---
id: MECW40-181
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, August 10, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 August 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 10 August 1858

7 Southgate

Dear Moor,

Back at the office again since yesterday. I wasn't ill, by the way, merely wounded SURGICALLY and, though the wound is not yet quite healed, the purpose has been achieved. In no circumstances shall I be in a condition to do a *Tribune* article before next week.

How's the Appleton affair going? You once wrote saying you were enclosing two letters from America,[1] but you forgot to do so. Did they have any bearing on it? In a fortnight's time I shall probably be going to the seaside, where I might be able to get down to some hard work on the thing.

Ephraim's[2] letter is strange indeed. How can anyone be so stupid as to part with something like that, actually put down in black and white? That's what I really call dubbing oneself a fool à *perpétuité.*

Lupus and I send our hearty congratulations to the two girls[3] on their achievements. The old chap was delighted about it. His leg is still not up to much. Borchardt undoubtedly treated the thing the wrong way and Lupus has mucked up matters by undue zeal and unnecessary foot-slogging. The thing might have other disagreeable, if not serious, consequences later on. He was in Buxton and then in Devonshire where he again had to endure the horror of bad hotels, got nothing to drink and was colossally fleeced.

I hope your wife, too, is now better. The tailor will be able to have half the amount in October.

Your

F. E.