---
id: MECW40-193
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 29, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "29 November 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwech-sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Publishe"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 29 November 1858

DEAR Frederick,

ARTICLE received.[1] VERY GOOD. *Quoad*[2] Bonaparte, I have lately dealt with two separate points—the SHAM PROVOCATION of England in the Portuguese affair[3] and how the fellow is GENERALLY avenging Waterloo 2 7 only in so far as he can do so by SHAM DEMONSTRATIONS within the 'limits of the English alliance' and hence, IN FACT, with the permission of the English government, although he is, in reality, England's underling. Secondly, his edict *re* the CORN- GRANARIES,[4] by which this 'socialist' proposes to remedy the ruinously LOW PRICES OF CORN—dangerously low, in view of the grumbles of the PEASANTRY—by creating an artificial demand at the BAKERS expense.[5]

GENERALLY, A VERY DANGEROUS EXPERIMENT THIS, TO RAISE THE PRICE OF CORN THROUGH GOVERNMENT UKASES. Increasing the cost of bread will do more harm to his popularity in the towns than it can do good in the country.

I have not written about the GENERAL RISING of the bourgeoisie in Europe but did, of course, allude to it in what I wrote about Prussia. I have dealt with the Russian peasant movement ABOUT twice in 6 months,[6] the second time simply to show that on the first occasion my diagnosis was correct.

As regards the reform movement in England, all I have discussed latterly is Bright's meeting in Birmingham,[7] the gist of the article being THAT HIS PROGRAMME IS A REDUCTION OF THE PEOPLES CHARTER TO THE MIDDLE CLASS STANDARD.[8] Earlier on, ABOUT 8-12 WEEKS ago (I think Parliament was actually still sitting), a piece to the effect that WHIGGISM MUST DISSOLVE AND COALESCE WITH TORYISM INTO THE PARTY OF *THE* ARISTOCRACY.[9] T h a t is all.

My wife is copying the manuscript[10] and it's hardly likely to go off before the end of this month. T h e reasons for the delay: long intervals of physical indisposition which, with the cold weather, has now come to an end. T o o much domestic and financial TROUBLE. Finally, the first section is now longer because the two initial chapters, of which the *first, The Commodity,* did not appear at all in the rough draft while the *second, Money, or Simple Circulation,* was only sketched in the briefest outline, have been written at greater length than I originally planned.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Mr Edgar Bauer is now the real, and Mr Lout and Weitlingian Scherzer the nominal, editor of the London *Neue Zeit.* Mr Edgar, of course, has a great deal to say on the subject of Mr Edgar and his lectures to the working men,[11] for he himself writes about everything concerning Mr Edgar. This CLOWN deems it necessary to take a revolutionary TURN. He presided at the Robert Blum ceremony. In an essay in the last issue the CLOWN makes the discovery that 'imperialism' has now been introduced into Prussia

in constitutional form.[12] This same issue is not uninteresting by reason of an article from Struve's *Sociale Republik*[13] which was, however, written over here by a certain Feibel and in which Freiligrath, on the occasion of the publication of his poems in America, had himself extolled AS THE TRUE HERO OF THE PROLETARIAN PARTY.