---
id: MECW40-026
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 28, 1856"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "28 July 1856"
year: 1856
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 28 July 1856

28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

A letter from my wife received today via Manchester brings news of her mother's[1] death on July 23. This will hasten her return to London.

At the same time a letter from Miquel, who is thinking of coming over here in a week or 10 days' time. Highly inconvenient just now.

Pieper lost his job a fortnight ago. Not his fault this time. He kept the thing secret so long as Lupus was here. The compositors conspired together to bring in a chap who belongs to their FRIENDLY SOCIETY.

As regards Sheffield, the matter stands as follows: In the last issue the fellows made some disgraceful cuts, whereupon Pieper wrote to Cyples: * 'I am directed by Dr Marx to inform you that he cannot congratulate you upon the emenda- tions, etc' * 7

Then the following letter arrived from Ironside:[2]

Dear Doctor,

It could not be satisfactory either to us or to yourself to close your article in the abrupt way which you on the instant proposed. I am sorry that I was so unsuccessful in cutting down last week's contributions, and should have hesitated in doing so had it not unfortunately happened that there was really no other alternative. As to Mr Ironside's note, permit me to say that in another letter since received from him, he expresses regret that you should have construed his scrap as he did not intend it, and intimates a doubt that J have in some way offended you? I see no reason why our professional intercourse may not continue and be pleasant; and I venture to hope to receive the usual packet of copy for next week's issue. You will be so good as to excuse my tardiness in writing. I have been so busy. Your etc. *Cyples.* Reply*

'Dear Sir, I write again myself to show that I bear not the least ill will against you for which, indeed, there would be no cause. In your letter d.d. July 19, you say: "It could not be satisfactory etc." Now as to my own satisfaction please to leave it altogether out of the question. As to Mr Ironside's "satisfaction" I'll quote you the exact words of his "note". Having told you, that already the first article had *"overdosed"* him, he continues as follows:

"They" (Dr Marx's articles) "are entombing the paper. This must not be. *They must be brought to a close forthwith.* You must not have more than two more doses—this week and the next. You had better write him at once *to that effect"*

'I *positively* decline making myself guilty of manslaughter by administering another "dose" to Mr Isaac Ironside and "entomb- ing" him in the sheets of his own paper. Yours etc:

Dr K. M.'*

Since then the correspondence has lapsed. But still no sign of any *money.* Jones tells me I could have taken the fellows to court over the whole affair AT THE OUTSET.

As you can imagine, I am like a cat on hot bricks. I shall have to do something about lodgings when the FAMILY arrives, but have no idea how to get out of the old ones or move into new, having neither the MEANS nor any immediate prospects. My electric brush strives vainly to make my hair darker, for *atra cura*[3] is making it whiter than ever. Zitschke has decamped, so at least I am excused *sine die* from paying him.

Espartero and Pucheta in the Spanish farce—never before has history so nicely confronted the hero of the liberal bourgeoisie with the hero of the 'mob'.[4]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Freiligrath has no one above him now apart from the BOARD OF DIRECTORS, which meets every Saturday.