---
id: MECW40-292
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, October 10, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 October 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed a"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 10 October 1859

DEAR Frederick,

The money arrived on Saturday and really 'saved our lives', for on that day the gang of creditors, or part of it, launched a concerted attack. MY BEST THANKS. Likewise for the manuscript.[1]

I enclose herewith my *Tribune* article on Kossuth.[2] Let Lupus have a look at it as well. *Then send it back to me.* There'll be a major rumpus, since Pulszky is the *Tribune's* London correspondent. T h e words b I *eitere* 'AUSTRIAN SYMPATHIES', 'ANTI-NAPOLEONIC RAGE', etc., are taken from Pulszky's LETTER *in* the *Tribune* in which h e sought to defend Kossuth and Co.[3] IN FACT I'm surprised that, in THESE CIRCUMSTANCES and in view of its general *faible* for Kossuth, the *Tribune* printed the article. True, I enclosed a brief note in German which put heart into Dana.

Collet has sent Kossuth 5 COPIES of the last *Free Press.* T h e Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung* has reproduced the thing.[4] Likewise the *Weser-Zeitung.* Collet came to see me yesterday. Statesman Blind had called on him and complained forcefully about his (Collet's) having failed to preserve editorial secrecy vis-à-vis myself. H e (Collet) must call on me to prevent my doing any more MISCHIEF. T h e Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung* was 'A RUSSIAN (!) ORGAN', which was why he (Blind) would not hold out a helping hand to it.[5] T o me, Collet said: *'At the outset, he made upon me the impression of a very sneakish fellow.' * Statesman Blind, like the gentleman he is, has not deigned to answer Liebknecht, and imagines he's been able to spike my guns through Collet. THE FOOL! At the same time he tried to get Collet to tell him who had written about Kossuth in the *[Free] Press. Salut.*

Your

K. M.