---
id: MECW40-282
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, September 22, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 September 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 22 September 1859

Dear Moor,

Lupus has just brought me your letter. I only got back the evening before last from a tour of Scotland with my parents[1] and have now packed them off home again.

A day or two before my old man arrived I had the most damnable bit of bad luck. At a drunken gathering I was insulted by an Englishman[2] I didn't know; I hit out at him with the umbrella I was carrying and the ferrule got him in the eye. The chap immediately put the matter in the hands of his LAWYER. I made the necessary counter-moves, and since his eye wasn't permanently damaged and he has now recovered, it at first seemed probable that the affair would be settled—though I would still be responsible for the costs. Now, however, the swine has suddenly done a *volte-face* and is threatening me with an ACTION; and if it came to that the thing would cost me over two hundred pounds, on top of which there would be a public scandal and a ROW with my old man, who would have to put up the money. However I still hope to get round the JOBBING LAWYERS; if all goes *really well* the DRUNKEN BRAWL will cost me forty or fifty pounds. The worst of it is that I'm completely in the hands of this swine and his SOLICITOR, can do nothing to force the issue and must put up with everything to avoid a scandal, otherwise the costs will be even heavier. Needless to say these blasted English don't want to deprive themselves of the pleasure of getting their hands on a

BLOODY FOREIGNER.

So this time my troubles have certainly not come singly. I simply don't know what to do until I can see how the business is going to turn out. My English acquaintances are behaving very honourably and instantly took the thing up, but I'm going to be bled, that's certain, and how much, heaven only knows.

At all events I shall send you a five-pound note about Saturday or Monday to prevent the worst happening; meanwhile I can get it carried over to the October account. You may rest assured that I

shall do whatever I can, but as you can see for yourself I don't really know where I am myself at the moment. Warm regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.