---
id: MECW40-095
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 21, 1857"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 September 1857"
year: 1857
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40, p. 173; First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Ryd*e

**[London,] 21 September 1857 9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill**

Dear Engels,

Nothing could please me more than to hear that your health is progressing.

Last Friday, a letter arrived from Dana, cool and curt. I replied that I would complain to the **Post Office** at once. Further, having '*Algeria*' and '*Ammunition*' to hand, I sent them off with the comment that I had **copies** of them; also that I had 'Army' in the original, and would send it off immediately a fresh copy had been made (I did this because in recent letters you have several times mentioned that 'Army' was almost finished); also, that '*Artillery*' would for the most part come under the **History of Cannon** and that I no longer had the manuscript. The *only A's now remaining* — and these I would send on the off-chance, although it is probably by now too late — were, all told, 'Army', 'Armada' and 'Ayacucho'. I mentioned the last 2 because you can keep them quite short, while the material I have sent you will provide some original stuff on the Armada and Ayacucho (about Espartero). That's how matters stand.

Tomorrow I shall send off 3 more biographies.

My circumstances won't permit me to come to Brighton, still less accompany you to Jersey.

On closer examination I find that all I want from you on the generals under B is an answer to my question about Bernadotte together with the essentials concerning Blücher, Bugeaud, Bosquet (in the Crimean War). I have enough on the other Frenchmen. Finally, Sir *G. Brown*, about whom I know nothing. Not much needed on the man.

I have sent Dana your B and C lists.

*Salut*.

Your
K. M.