---
id: MECW40-274
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 8, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 August 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 August 1859

Dear Engels,

As a result of an attack of vomiting that has now lasted for two whole days, I am as weak as a fly and hence cannot write more than a few lines.

Would it be possible to scrape together some money for the *Volk* by *Wednesday morning?*

Last Monday (Monday is always settlement day; i.e. a week ago today) the *toted deficit* had been reduced to no more than about £2. (This did not, of course, include the charge for No. 13, which only has to be met today, and still less for No. 14, where payment doesn't fall due until today week. The issues are, of course, only charged at the end of the week following publication.) So things are in good shape. But today there is further expenditure to be met, in addition to the usual £1 extra (15/- for Lessner, 5 for the OFFICE). I myself am under so much PRESSURE that I cannot at this moment advance a *single FARTHING* and am, moreover, wasting an inordinate amount of time over the business. As for philistine Freiligrath, he imagines that he is giving adequate proof of his 'convictions' by maintaining a 'neutral' attitude towards ourselves and the *Hermann.*

Ledru and L. Blanc have united to publish a paper, the *Union Républicaine.* It is to appear at the beginning of next month from the same press as the *Volk,* and would benefit the latter in as much as Hollinger would then print by machine instead of by hand as heretofore.[1] It makes the continued existence of the *Volk* all the more essential, by the by.

Later on (as soon as I'm fit again), I shall write to Germany about the business. And to Borchardt too?

To make the thing a PAYING proposition more quickly, fresh outlays would be necessary in a town like London: errand-boys besides Lessner, etc.

Strohn not back yet? No answer yet from Duncker, the swine? Regards to Lupus and Gumpert.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.