---
id: MECW40-300
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 7, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 November 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 7 November 1859

Dear Engels,

I shall send you the Grimm.[1]

*I have not written anything yet about Morocco,*[2] or about the Caucasus,[3] or any military stuff on Asia. I have no diplomatic particulars about Morocco, so you will have to pick up your pen again. My circumstances are such as to preclude my doing sufficient work on the 2nd instalment, which I regard as of crucial importance.[4] It does, in fact, contain the pith of all the bourgeois stuff.

Biskamp's letter[5] is infinitely discreditable; in view of his situation one can explain but not excuse it. The whole of vulgar democracy is seeking to hush up the Blind affair in the German press while assailing me. E.g. Mr Meyen, present editor of the *Freischütz.*[6] I have now sent a sharply-worded statement to the Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung* and the *Reform* in Hamburg.[7] I shall bring Vogt and Blind face to face even if it has to be done at gun point.

In a couple of lines in the *Tribune* the wretched Pulszky dismisses my letter[8] as emanating from the camp of the 'CRACKED' Urquhart.[9] The fellows dare not open their traps. For they don't know what kind of evidence we have at our disposal. For Kossuth, or so Szemere wrote and told me, secretly decamped after the treaty of Villafranca without a word to Klapka and the other officers. For he was afraid of being handed over to the Austrians.[10] Hence the greatest animosities against him in the Hungarian camp. I shall give Pulszky a thorough lambasting.

Your

K. M.