---
id: MECW40-290
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, October 5, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "5 October 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 5 October [1859]

Dear Engels,

In view of the way things are managed here (Speck has gone bankrupt and disappeared; Garthe, the cashier, is in Brighton) and always have been managed so far as the *Volk* is concerned, it is impossible to obtain an accurate account AS TO FOREIGN [out-of- town] SUBSCRIBERS during the pre-Lessner period. Biskamp maintains that, with the exception of the very first issues, Thimm was always sent a dozen copies.

Hollinger is suing me for £12 and a couple of shillings arrears in respect of *Das Volk,* together with the type for the last issue, which did not appear. The dirty dog is trying to make out all of a sudden that I'm the 'proprietor', although the whole business, I won't say foundered (for your philistine here is a hopeless proposition), but closed down with a deficit because I *wasn't* the proprietor and was unable to knock the slipshod management into shape despite all the time I spent on it. Still less did I ever give the chap a legal guarantee. I think his account is wrong, for apart from the other moneys received, the fellow had had £7 from me *for the 3 penultimate issues alone* (his account covers the last 2 issues).—The 15/- for Lessner did not go through his hands but was paid direct by me.—However, I'm not going to engage in any controversy on the subject since I would thereby immediately acknowledge his right to sue *me.* The dirty dog will swear on oath and get one of his type-setters to swear on oath that I gave a guarantee. (Even were this the case he should have sued Biskamp first.) I shall call in Biskamp, etc., to give counter-evidence. Had I the means, I should have avoided all *public* proceedings, not by paying Hollinger, but by buying the debt he incurred with one Lisle, Hollinger's LANDLORD and *owner* of the press. Hollinger owes this man some £60 and has never paid him a FARTHING.

But circumstances being what they are, there can be no question of anything of the kind.

Unless I bring off some sort of coup—and I simply cannot see *how* I can do so—my position will become *completely* untenable. Freiligrath made another attempt at negotiating a bill. But

yesterday evening, at the same time as threatening letters from the LANDLORD, etc., etc., a letter arrived from him saying it was definitely no go. The enclosed letter from Lassalle, which I answered by return,)[1] looks like good news to me. The thing[2] appears to be selling despite the *conspiration de silence.* Otherwise I wouldn't have received this *indirect* request from Duncker. I shall, by the by, be totally incapable of going on with the thing[3] until I've CLEARED up the worst of the domestic mess *d'une manière ou d'une autre.*[4] Your articles[5] on my affair have been reprinted in German papers from New York to California (with the tiny little *Volk* we hooked the whole of the German-American press). To show you the kind of rubbish that's appearing in Germany, I enclose a cutting of the advertisements in the Vienna *Presse. Il suffit*[6] TO READ the index. (By THE BY, I am giving lectures about the first instalment to a *select* circle of artisans.[7] It seems to interest the chaps a great deal.[8]

Lastly, a report on two 'great men'.[9]

*Ad vocem[10] R. Schramm.* Some while ago this pitiful blockhead was in Ostend, whence he sent a contribution to the *Hermann.*[11]

Not that I'm in the habit of reading that trashy sheet; I heard about this through Freiligrath. In his contribution R. Schramm declares that one could gauge the depths to which the Germans had sunk simply by listening to their conversations on the beach. Thus he had, for instance, overheard two ladies chattering away in broad Wuppertal accents and one of them had addressed the other as 'Mrs Engels'. So that's the kind of revenge this wretch takes! But by way of retribution the blockhead recently lost £2,000 *(teste*[12] Freiligrath), having, like a fool, entered the 'precious stones business'. This had, moreover, frustrated his scheme of starting a German paper of his own in London (was to have come out this month). To the chap's intense annoyance and as a riposte to his childish MALICE, I got Biskamp to see that the FACTS—non- appearance of the paper, gem trade and loss of money—were published in the *Weser-Zeitung. Ad vocem K. Blind.* With regard to this *homme d'état,* I must go into greater detail.

About a fortnight after my return to London from Manchester, Biskamp told me that Blind had proposed, through Hollinger, that he (i.e. *Das Volk)* amalgamate with Blind and company but

that I, and the communist element generally, must go. In our stead—sensible socialism. At that time I had, as you know, written nothing for the *Volk* save for a pleasantry or two.[13] However, I forthwith wrote Blind, not a letter, but a communication of ABOUT IO LINES[14] in which I called him amongst other things an **homme d'état** and an 'important man', and alluded to his henchman 'Fidelio'[15] (i.e. Hollinger). Next day along comes Liebknecht, and tells me that Blind and Hollinger are sitting in the pub on the corner. The former, he said, was expecting me. I therefore went there with Liebknecht. Blind gave his word of honour that there was *nothing* in the thing. That swine Hollinger ditto. Hence I could only believe them. However, the meeting gave me a chance of finding out about other machinations of Blind's. *Inter alia,* the conversation came round to Vogt. Blind assured me on his *word of honour* (as he had already assured Freiligrath, though omitting his word of honour) that he had neither written the anonymous *Zur Warnung* nor launched it upon the world. I said this surprised me, since it contained no more than what he had told me *by word of mouth* on the occasion of Urquhart's meeting on 9 May.[16] I reminded him that he had assured me at the time that he possessed *tangible evidence,* knew the name of the man to whom Vogt had offered 30,000 or 40,000 gulden, but 'unfortunately' could not divulge it, etc. Well, Blind hadn't the face to deny this but expressly admitted it more than once in Liebknecht's and Hollinger's presence.

WELL! A few weeks ago the Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung* wrote to Liebknecht, who had sent them *Zur Warnung.* Liebknecht came to me.[17] I told him to go and find Blind, and that I should await the *homme d'état* 'in the pub at Blind's corner'. Blind was at some resort—St. Leonard's, I think. Liebknecht wrote to him; wrote once, twice. At last a letter from the *homme d'état.* In the coolest and most 'diplomatic' manner the latter regretted that T should have called to see him in vain. Liebknecht, he went on, must understand that he (Blind) had no desire to intervene in the affairs of a 'paper with which he had absolutely nothing to do' and in a matter with which he had absolutely nothing to do. As for Liebknecht's allusions to 'remarks' let fall 'in the course of a private conversation', these could only be attributed to a 'complete' misunderstanding. And that, or so the **homme d'état** imagined, was that.

I now took Liebknecht with me to Collet. I recalled that *The Free Press* of *27 May* ('The Grand Duke Constantine',[18] etc., p. 53) had contained a paragraph which I immediately suspected to be Blind's handiwork and which, taken in conjunction with Blind's *verbal* admissions before Liebknecht, Hollinger and myself, constituted the entire contents of the anonymous pamphlet, besides providing *proof* that it was not just *en passant,* in the course of a 'private conversation', that Blind had touched on this 'matter with which he had absolutely nothing to do'. Hence to Collet, who *instantly* declared Blind to be the AUTHOR. He still had Blind's letter in which the latter had enclosed his card but had asked that his *name* should not be disclosed. This was convincing evidence.

By a series of manoeuvres which it would take too long to describe here, I further extracted the enclosed *(which you must let me have back by return.* I have also shown it to Freiligrath). So much for the respectable citizen's 'word of honour'!

Well, last Saturday Liebknecht sent the *homme d'état* a letter (modelled on a letter from myself to Liebknecht in which I had summed the matter up in somewhat forceful terms)[19]. We are awaiting the answer and will let you know the details.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.