---
id: MECW40-261
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Lassalle, June 10, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 June 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in: F. Lassalle. *Nachgelassene Briefe und Schriften*, Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin 1922 This letter was first published in an abridged English translation in The Letters of Karl Marx, se"
status: raw
---

*To Ferdinand Lassalle in Berlin*

[London,] 10 June 1859

Dear Lassalle,

Since I wrote to you last I have had to prepare and send off 15 printed sheets for the English-American cyclopaedia, which is appearing in New York.[1] This is no joke, what with my other work. Today is the day for the *Tribune* articles.[2] So there's not a minute to spare. Hence I'm merely writing to let you know that I got your letters as well as the pamphlet.[3]

This much for the present:

*Ad vocem*[4] *Sickingen*: Shall read it as soon as I have time and let you have a reply.[5]

*Ad vocem pamphlet:* In no way corresponds with my own view or that of my party friends in England. It is probable, by the by, that we shall express our view in print.

*Ad vocem Duncker:* Have written to tell him I'm sorry if my letter offended him. However it's a scandalous piece of procrastination. I received the last proof-sheet[6] as much as 5 weeks ago. You can't expect me—once I have a contract—to behave towards a publisher or permit myself to be treated by him as though he were printing the thing only as a 'favour' to yourself. One good turn he has already done me, and that is to lose me my English publisher until further notice.

*Ad vocem Vogt* (Imperial bailiff):[7] We possess evidence, not only that the man has received money for himself from Bonaparte, but also money to suborn Germans in the interests of Franco-Russian propaganda.[8] Up till now he has succeeded only in the case of that politically negative quantity, Gottfried Kinkel.

*Ad vocem Proudhon:* Is said to have gone out of his mind and been put in a lunatic asylum in Brussels.

Salut.

Your

K. M.