---
id: MECW40-162
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, April 22, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 April 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 22 April 1858

Dear Moor,

I wrote to your wife last week and the following day sent an article on Lucknow[1] and also *Guardians* (or cuttings, I don't remember exactly). I hope everything arrived safely. 2 more *Guardians* go off today. Russell's report in Tuesday's *Times*[2] did not have the makings of an article, but I'm saving it up until the arrival of the next mail; this is sure to bring the last part of the Lucknow story, when the whole thing can be polished off all at one go—with, I hope, the help of Campbell's despatches as well. Meanwhile I have thrown myself into 'Cavalry' again—shall leave open bits of the historical section for the present until I can unearth the relevant sources, and shall get on with the tactical side. The article will probably take up 10 or 12 of my long double pages, and maybe more.

The *affaire* Bernard[3] will greatly mortify Monsieur Bonaparte and make quite an impression on the refugee *crapauds* in London. James' speech, by the way, was feeble and *décousu*[4] and as usual old Campbell's summing up went against the PRISONER. The old donkey is vexed at losing the chance of an interesting legal case when he could have presided over 15 other judges.

The revelations made by Cavour and La Marmora[5] about their relations with Cavaignac and the latter's fear of Austria[6] will be of interest to the *républicains purs.* The more that comes to light about the *National's* period of supremacy, the more pitiful it seems.

Your

F. E.