---
id: MECW40-092
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 15, 1857"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "15 September 1857"
year: 1857
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN RYDE

[London,] 15 September [1857]

Dear Engels,

You must excuse my silence and non-ACKNowLEDGMENT of your various packages, due firstly to a great deal of work and secondly to numerous time-consuming errands in which 'inner compulsion' played no part whatever. I trust *your health continues to improve* despite the bad weather, and have still not abandoned the NOTION that you will be taking iron in the end. Only I'm afraid all this writing may be harmful to you.

I expect a letter from Dana on Friday. Today I sent him 'Barclay', 'Berthier', 'Blum', 'Bourrienne' and your contributions.:[1] It is important that I should send off the 2nd lot of B's next week. I have certain queries to put to you in my next about the French generals who are next on my list. As to Bern's Polish DEEDS have found the following[2]

Distinguished himself at the battle of Iganin, when he engaged 40 Russian heavy calibre cannon with 12 light and 4 heavy guns, and subsequently at the battle of Ostrolenka.[3] Here he galloped his battery up to the line of Russian skirmishers, subjected the detachments which had crossed the Narev to devastating fire, withstood a hail of shot from 80 guns, and forced the enemy to withdraw. After this engagement promoted to colonel, shortly afterwards to command of the entire artillery and, when the Polish forces were concentrating at Warsaw, to general. During 5 and 6 September Bern committed all his guns to battle, siting his field pieces between the separate defensive works of the outer line. On the 6th, he advanced with 40 guns until he was just below Wola, already in Russian hands, but, having neither infantry nor cavalry in support, was compelled to retire. When the Polish army fell back on Praga during the night of the 7th, he occupied the bridge with 40 guns. On the morning of the 8th, however, he was informed of the agreement made with the Russians and of Malachowski's order to proceed with the artillery to Modlin. Cf. his memoir, *Allgemeine Augsburger Zeitung,* 1831, in which he discusses recent developments and attacks Krukowiecki.[4]

I don't trust the above authority an inch and would therefore ask you to investigate and to do me a short, amended version of the passage concerned, if possible putting it straight into English. I shall look up the information you ask for at the Museum tomorrow.[5]

Your

K. M.