---
id: MECW40-142
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 14, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 February 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published slightly abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 "
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 February 1858

Dear Engels,

You had promised to send me the *Guardian.* I was therefore expecting to get it today since France is now the only possible topic for reports and the fellows prefer a few gossipy anecdotes to ANY AMOUNT OF IDEAS. I assume the numbers you promised me will arrive tomorrow but would most urgently beg that in future you always let me have the things for Thursday or for Friday at the latest. *After* the appointed day they are, OF COURSE, no longer of any use to me for my reports.

For 3 days I shall now be on tenterhooks until I know whether or not my bill, which does not appear to have been despatched from here until several weeks AFTER ITS DRAWING, has been honoured. At very best I shan't be able to draw anything more on the *Tribune* against the articles I have sent in until the matter with Appleton is SETTLED.[2] My estimate of the value of the last goods despatched to him was badly out. Moreover, a longish article on '*Bolivar** elicited objections from Dana because, he said, it is written IN A PARTISAN STYLE and he asked me to cite my AUTHORITIES. This I can, of course, do, although it's a singular demand. As regards the PARTISAN STYLE, it is true that I departed somewhat from the tone of a cyclopaedia. T o see the most dastardly, most miserable and meanest of blackguards described as Napoleon I was altogether too much. Bolivar is a veritable Soulouque.[3]

I CONGRATULATE you UPON YOUR EQUESTRIAN PERFORMANCES. Only don't take too many breakneck jumps, as there will soon be more important occasion for risking your neck. You seem TO RIDE SOMEWHAT HARD THIS HOBBYHORSE. In any case I don't believe that the CAVALRY is the speciality in which you will be of the greatest service to Germany. I would venture another little objection, viz. whether OVEREXERTION IN ANY LINE is compatible with your health. *Aurea mediocritas*[4] in all types of exertion, or so at least a doctor assures me, should remain the norm for you for some time yet.

T h e Bonaparte affair[5] had indeed put a sorry end to the proposed Prussian amnesty.[6] Louis, by the way, is merely aping his putative uncle.[7] H e is, in fact, not only *Napoleon le Petit* (in Victor Hugo's sense[8] as opposed to *Napoléon le Grand)* but he PERSONATES IN A MOST ADMIRABLE WAY THE LITTLENESS o f t h e g r e a t N a p o l e o n. I have looked u p Cobbett for 1802-03 where I discover that the 'DEN OF ASSASSINS' AND ALL THAT LITERALLY appeared in the *Moniteur* of that time.[9] *Inter alia,* the *Moniteur* of 9 August 1802 declares word for word:

•'Either the English government authorises and tolerates these public and private crimes, in which case it cannot be said that such conduct is consistent with British generosity, civilisation, and honour; or it cannot prevent them, in which case it does not deserve the name of government; above all, if it does not possess the means of repressing *assassination* and calumny and protecting *social order.'*[10]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

If you haven't yet sent off the *back* numbers of the *Guardian,* try and let me have them by Monday, and the next ones by Friday.