---
id: MECW40-163
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 29, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "29 April 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed a"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 29 April 1858

DEAR Frederick,

My long silence can be explained in one word—inability to write. This existed (AND TO SOME DEGREE EXISTS STILL) not only IN THE

LITERARY, but IN THE LITERAL SENSE OF THE WORD. The few obligatory articles for the *Tribune*[1] were dictated to my wife, but even that was only possible by APPLYING STRONG STIMULI. Never before have I had such a violent *attaque* of liver trouble and FOR SOME TIME there was a

fear that it might be sclerosis of the liver. The doctor wanted me to travel but *d'abord*[2] that was incompatible with the STATE OF FINANCE, and secondly I hoped from day to day to be able to start work again. The persistent urge to get down to WORK coupled with inability to do so helped aggravate my condition. However there's been an improvement during the past week. But I'm not yet capable of working. Whenever I sit down and write for a couple of hours I have to lie quite fallow for a couple of days. I hope to heaven that this state of affairs comes to an end next week. It couldn't have happened at a more inconvenient time. Obviously I overdid my nocturnal labours last winter. *Hinc illae lacrimae.*[3]

Your letters and *Guardians* arrived safely. A book has appeared by Louis Blanc on the revolution of 1848.[4]

Evinces the most candid admiration for the **petit***[5] * which, or so he says, is what the workers call him. If read carefully, however, it makes the fellow look an ass for it shows that on every crucial occasion the workers acted without his knowledge or consent and generally returned him sentiment for 'sentiment', taking the view that they had thereby paid the oracle of Luxembourg his FULL

PRICE.[6]

The movement for the emancipation of the serfs in Russia strikes me as important in so far as it indicates the beginning of an internal development that might run counter to the country's traditional foreign policy. Herzen, of course, has discovered afresh that 'liberty' has emigrated from Paris to Moscow.

Friend Bangya, AS IT SEEMS, has been caught out by Sefer Pasha's son[7] engaging in unauthorised correspondence with Philipson, the Russian general. It is said that he HAS BEEN SHOT together with a number of his Hungarian and Polish accomplices.

Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.