---
id: MECW40-010
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 10, 1856"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 April 1856"
year: 1856
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 April 1856

DEAR Frederic,

It is high time I wrote again. I've been prevented from doing so by all kinds of domesticities.

Enclosed 1 letter from Levy to me, from Düsseldorf. T h e T o u r o u t e mentioned in the letter is a French ex-colonel. H e called yesterday while I was out and so I shall not be seeing him for several days as he has gone to Liverpool. He had a longish conversation with my wife, the quintessence of which is contained in *enclosure 2,*[1] T h e M. mentioned in Levy's letter is Miquel.

In a few days' time you will receive *Igor,*;[2] which has now arrived; Russian-German; the BLUE BOOK[3] Destrilhes, *Confidences sur la Turquie* and a cutting from *L'Homme,* which I have mislaid and hence cannot send today, viz. a letter from a *déporté* in Cayenne, Tassilier by name, to M. le Ministre de la Marine,[4] in which the frightful abominations to which Boustrapa 4 0 subjects the deportees are revealed.[5] You would have had the BLUE BOOK long ago but first of all the PRESSURE of daily events has several times compelled me to suspend work on my articles[6] on this subject and write about other themes, so that I was unable to do without the book. T h e n the friends whom you know arrived. They wanted to have the NOVELTY just for *one* day, and had not yet returned it a week later.

As TO THESE KARS PAPERS, *The Times,* in three fulminating LEADERS,[7]

gave a rehash of the section covering August 1854 to ABOUT February 1855, i.e. *did not so much as touch on* the really interesting and crucial period. T h e object of this is, of course, to shift all RESPONSIBILITY from the Ministry onto Redcliffe and the Turkish pashas in Asia. T h e best of it is that the English government, as you will see from Destrilhes, forcibly kept at the helm Redcliffe's rotten Turkish ministry, thus partly condoning and partly bringing about the abominations of which Williams complains. That, however, is only a minor matter. By a procedure similar to the one used in Stieber's case[8] —namely, by producing proof of FALSIFIED DATES AND FORGED PASSAGES—I have, in my view, proved irrefutably that the responsibility for planning the fall of Kars and for the systematic execution of that plan, lay with the British GOVERNMENT, which furthermore had the good fortune this time to figure in Bonaparte's eyes as zealous 'in the cause'. I have not, OF COURSE, gone into the military aspect proper, i.e. the DEFENCE OF KARS; I have some MISGIVINGS, however, about the 'stature' of Williams.

Jones, to whom I have shown my manuscript, intends IF POSSIBLE—i.e. if he can get together enough money to take St. Martin's Hall[9] —to LECTURE on the FALL OF KARS at the said venue before the debate on it in Parliament begins.

There is now going on a bitter controversy between the Chartists and the Urquhartites at Newcastle upon Tyne, London, Birmingham, and several other places.[10] As you will have heard, Jones, with Finlen for shadow, has proclaimed himself dictator of Chartism and set up a new organisation which, INDEED, is in process of growing but has, on the other hand, evoked a great storm of indignation against him.[11]

The 'speculation upon speculation'—not in ideas but in shares— which has invaded the Rhine Province and Berlin from France would appear to be proliferating as viciously there as on the other side of the Rhine. Jeremiads about this social MISCHIEF, this infatuation, are appearing in the Ministry's *Preussische Correspon- dent,* in which the imminence of an 'inevitable' and general financial crisis is SERIOUSLY AND EMPHATICALLY hinted at.

You will know about Heine's death, but not about Ludwig Simon of Trier pissing—passing water, I mean—on his grave in the New York *Neue Zeit* run by Löwe, quondam lion[12] of the Parliament of the 'Cherman' Nation[13] after its retreat to Stuckert.[14]

This poet or minnesinger of the female Yid, Madame Hohenscheisse-esche or-linden of Frankfurt am Main, is naturally of the opinion that Heine was no poet; he had 'no sensibility', was full of 'malevolence' and calumniated not only Kobes I,[15] but even Berne's[16] lady friend, the great Berne's 'mouse', muse or moose— the Strauss woman.[17]

Down here there is A SOCIETY FOR THE PROTECTION OF SMALL TRADESMEN. This SOCIETY publishes a weekly rag[18] for the said protection. In that weekly our friend Seiler 'along with his wife' is pilloried as a 'SWINDLER'.

BUT greater things are afoot. Pieper, thanks to his genius, has again been living a freebooter's existence since January and, despite the not inconsiderable SUBSIDIES provided by me, has been daily on the *qui vive* vis-à-vis his LANDLADY. NOW it has suddenly occurred to him that all he requires to become a great man is a litde capital. Seiler's SISTER-IN-LAW, die GREENGROCER'S 2nd daughter, a tallow-candle in green spectacles, has long been mortally in love with the said Pieper. H e r entire person green like verdigris rather than veg., and GREENS to boot without ANY MEAT or FLESH WHATEVER. While declaring her to be ugly as the day, Pieper has nevertheless discovered that she is not without intelligence, of which she gives incontrovertible proof by regarding our Hanoverian lambkin as a German Byron *manqué.* So, the day before yesterday, therefore, Pieper, to whom this person clings, not simply like a burr b u t like a CATERPILLAR, resolved to pour out his heart to Seiler's father-in- law. H e did not wish to d o so in front of his 'beloved' for fear h e might have to kiss her, which indeed is HARD WORK for an occidental unaccustomed TO FEED UPON TALLOW. But in true Pieper-fashion, the declaration of love was combined with—a touch for a loan. Pieper could not disburden his heart to the GREENGROCER without inviting the GREENGROCER to disburden his POCKETS, not to say his till. O n the grounds, that is, of his needing a litde capital, SAY »MO POUNDS, TO CREATE HIMSELF A POSITION as a FASHIONABLE tutor. Meanwhile he intends to let his 'beloved' enjoy the pleasures of widowhood while still betrothed, nor will his compassion *ever* permit him to marry her. GREENS or n o GREENS, die whole business is most unsavoury, but Pieper imagines he will come out of it as a m a n of honour, i.e. AT A CERTAIN EPOCH LOOMING IN THE FUTURE repay down to the last farthing the advances h e 'hopes' to obtain from his would-be father-in-law, generously leaving him his daughter into the bargain. Since that fateful day h e has been back to my house only once, for a minute, while I was out. Called himself a 'happy man'. Litde Jenny called him 'BENEDICK THE MARRIED MAN',[19] but litde Laura said: 'BENEDICK WAS A

WIT, HE IS BUT A CLOWN, AND A CHEAP CLOWN TOO.' T h e children are constandy reading Shakespeare.

Liebknecht has at last achieved something, to wit, a litde Liebknecht.

By 'His Majesty's supreme and special command' my wife has received a passport from Berlin. In May she will travel to Trier with the whole FAMILY for 3-4 months. *Salut.* Regards to Lupus.

K. M.