---
id: MECW40-216
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 15, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "15 February 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 15 February 1859

Dear Engels,

Herewith:

1. Letter from my brother-in-law (the CAPE MAN)[1] from which you will see that the fellow will be landing in London tomorrow. Since I am *sans sou*[2] (only last Saturday I had to pawn my wife's last 'spare' skirt in order to send Eccarius SOME COMFORTS) and have got to entertain the man decently—he is going to Trier and carries some weight in the TRANSACTIONS with my mother[3] —I must once again press you to mail me AT LEAST £1. Luckily I have what is known as mumps, which means that I only have to entertain the man here at home and, as an invalid, can refuse to do any gadding about.

2. Letter from Eccarius. I had told the latter (who seemed, I thought, to be improving a little) that if he needed wine he was to let me know. So you should send him ABOUT 2 BOTTLES OF port wine.

3. 2 enclosures from *The Free Press* (the more important for having been reprinted from *The New York Herald)'[4] will give you some idea of the Chinese war[5] and Mr Palmerston's policy.*

*Ad vocem*)[6] *Freiligrath.* I came, most opportunely for him, on the very day he got your letter.[7] He gave it to me to read and excused himself for the non-political nature of the poem[8] on the grounds that he was a 'poet'. Also said he had written to you about the *Hermann* simply as a 'joke'.[9] WELL, AFTER THESE VERY MEAGRE EXPLANATIONS, he said he would write and tell you that he had made everything ALL RIGHT with me. By the by, your letter 'tickled' him tremendously. I told him that it was 'very well written' and he, of course, couldn't help laughing at me for looking to 'style' first of all ON SUCH AN OCCASION. The FACT is, Freiligrath realises that Kinkel has *used* him and, having used him, is actually becoming somewhat uppish towards him. (Thus, to Freiligrath's intense annoyance, the **Schriften von Gottfried und Johanna Kinkel'* figure in large type among the *Hermann's* advertisements and, under the *same* heading, ****F. Freiligraths Gedichte** in small type, so that Freiligrath's poems are annexed to the works of Gottfried and Johanna. This greatly riles our philistine.) On the other hand, Freiligrath is very much beholden to Kinkel for having, apparently against all expectations, again put him in the way of a *****political purgative* which, BY THE BY, and if I am not mistaken, has earned him high praise and even, it is said, presents from philistines in Germany. *Nota bene:* Mrs Daniels wrote to Lina[10] (in reply to some quips about the Kinkel CASE the latter had sent her): ****We** (she and Heinrich, the quiet one[11] **are delighted* and *entranced* by Freilig- rath's poem' and the day-dreaming Heinrich, who had grown 'still more self-confident and still more energetic', had actually discov- ered that 'the perfidious' *Kölnische Zeitung* had suppressed the 'most important verse', a verse which existed only in Heinrich's Olympian imagination.

What's this about Blind? *Apropos.* Did you and Lupus see in the papers (maybe a month or six weeks ago) that *Madame* Bangya in Paris had been sentenced to six months hard labour for soliciting?

*Salut.*

Your

K. M. I've lost Lupus' address again. It's 59 Boundary Street, Greenheys, isn't it? At any rate I sent him a letter to that address.

Schapper's wife has produced a son, and the old fool, who now goes in for phrenology, has discovered that the seven days'-old IMP has a sanguine-choleric temperament.