---
id: MECW40-014
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 26, 1856"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 April 1856"
year: 1856
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 26 April 1856

28 Dean Street, Soho

DEAR Frederic,

Enclosed you will find

1. 2 Kars PAPERS, third and final instalments.[1]

2. An article on the Duke of York[2] which I gave Jones, and in which I imitate OLD Cobbett's manner *tant bien que mal.*[3] Sent especially for Lupus' information.

3. The SPEECH made by Frost, the old Chartist, in New York.[4]

4. A letter from Miquel. This last *to be returned.* For I have not yet replied, as I should like to have your detailed 'OPINION' before doing so. It's a somewhat ticklish matter. 'Questions, sometimes insidious',[5] and when replying it is difficult to know how far one can properly go.[6]

*Que dites-vous du discours de* M. de Walewski?[7] Everyone in London is furious with the GOVERNMENT and even the SHOPKEEPERS are mouthing revolutionary slogans.

If you can, send Pieper something. It is now possible that he will get a job as CORRECTOR on *The People's Paper.* All. I can do now is keep him in commons. I have taken him seriously to task for his silly antics, which have landed him on the streets again. I could tell you a thing or two about politics down here, but to do so by post might be risky.

The news from Paris in today's *Advertiser* contains a brief but interesting report on an action brought against some members of Marianne;[8] they're conducting themselves splendidly.

In the *Presse* (Paris) some edifying aspersions on Bonaparte's

*législateur poète*—Belmontet—by Pelletan, in which the latter has so insulted the 'empereur'[9] that he will probably be expelled.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.