---
id: MECW40-113
title: "Letter to Conrad Schramm, December 8, 1857"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 December 1857"
year: 1857
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40, p. 217; First published: in Marx and Engels, Works, Moscow, 1934."
status: raw
---

*To Conrad Schramm in St Hélier in Jersey*

Dear Schramm,

Write soon and tell us how Jersey suits you. I did not see Engels when he passed through London on his return journey because he gave me the wrong time for our meeting at the **railway station**. Did that ass Reventlow reply? Not that I suppose there's anything at all to the whole affair, since in any case these **Americans** are incapable of paying just now; I only ask because of the **behaviour** of this mighty hero. And how about Mr Faucher? Has he paid up yet? That **crazy** *Berlinois* **grows from day to day stupider. Witness the foreign news of *The Morning Star***, a name that bears a certain analogy with *lucus a non lucendo*. In fact the entire English press gets worse every day, even without German assistance. Quite apart from the seismic effects of the **general crisis** which must delight every connoisseur, it is truly a relief when one is no longer forced to listen every day to the **English self-laudations as to the 'bravery' of 'their English in India'.** It was really getting on one's nerves, * this overtrading in other people's courage on the part of the English paterfamilias and penny-a-liner who lives quietly at home and is uncommonly averse to anything threatening him with the remotest chance of obtaining military glory *.

Apart from the family circle, I am now pretty well cut off here. I seldom see my few acquaintances nor, on the whole, is this any great loss. The life you lead in Jersey can hardly be much quieter. I fear that as time goes on you will weary of your stay, or have you struck up acquaintanceships **of any kind**? True, Harney is **so far** quite a companionable fellow, but *toujours perdrix* is, of course, apt to pall. I hope to see you again in the spring, provided you don't move further south. In any case **drop one or two lines**.

*Salut*.

Your
K. M.