---
id: MECW40-044
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, about January 22, 1857"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 January 1857"
year: 1857
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester, about 22 January 1857][1]

Dear Marx,

Your letter arrived like a bolt from the blue. I had believed that everything was going splendidly at last—you in a decent house and the whole BUSINESS settled; and now it turns out that everything's in doubt. What damned stingy fellows these Yankees are; the people on the *Tribune* seem to imagine that, having squeezed you like a lemon, they must now proceed to squeeze another one. But the manner in which they are trying to break things off is particularly mean and cowardly. They want to force you to take the initiative. Furthermore, ever since Cluss fell so strangely silent, we've not had one reliable man in the whole of America.

*Que faire cependant?*[2] Since the *Tribune* is definitely intent on breaking with you this time, I think the best thing would be to establish connections with another New York paper. Might not something be arranged with the *Herald* or the *Times?*[3] In your place I would at once make a move and keep the chaps on the *Tribune* dangling until everything is arranged. In view of the fellows' shabby behaviour you need only consult your own interests and show no consideration for them. If you think that an *indirect* move would be better, let me know. I will gladly carry out the negotiations in *my* name, so that you shan't be compromised; I could write saying I have reason to believe that you don't get on as well as you used to with the *Tribune* people and that some arrangement might perhaps be made, etc., etc. *Enfin*[4] anything you want, *pourvu que quelque chose soit faite.*[5]

I wouldn't put it beyond the *Tribune* fellows to have stirred up trouble with Putnam too. I should write at once to Putnam to clear the matter up. One doesn't even know whether to write the article on coastal fortifications or not.[6] At all events it would be advisable to keep this source of income open as well.

I shall send you £5 early in February and for the time being you can count on getting this every month. Even if it means my facing the new financial year with a load of debts, *c'est égal*[7] I only wish you had told me about the business a fortnight earlier. For my Christmas present my old man gave me the money to buy a horse and, as there was a good one going, I bought it last week. If I'd known about this business of yours I would have waited a month or two and saved the cost of its keep. But NEVER MIND, that doesn't have to be paid for straight away. But I'm exceedingly vexed that I should be keeping a horse here while you and your family are down on your luck in London. It goes without saying, by the way, that you shouldn't let the promise of £5 a month deter you from approaching me again in case of hardships, for if anything can be done I shall do it. Anyhow, I've got to turn over a new leaf; I've been leading far too frivolous an existence of late.

Warm regards to your wife and children and let me know soon what you propose to do and how things stand.

Your

F. E.