---
id: MECW40-024
title: "Letter to Isaac Ironside, June 21, 1856"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 June 1856"
year: 1856
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 29, Moscow 1962. Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ISAAC IRONSIDE[1]

IN SHEFFIELD

[Draft]

Manchester, [21 June 1856] 34 Butler St., Greenheys

Dear Sir,

I received your letter d.d. June 14 this morning only, as it had to be sent to me here to Manchester where I shall stay for some weeks.

I have duly considered your proposal, and, on the whole, accede to it.[2] In a matter like this, it is impossible to mention expressly every small particular, to agree upon the size of type pp., neither can I anticipate that any difficulties may arise therefrom, nor from the reservations to make as to 'copy *used'.*

I shall therefore provide you in time for next Saturday's but one's publication with fully 2 columns of matter and keep you amply supplied every week to that extent.

It would be most convenient to me (if your arrangements admit of it) to receive a remittance say after every fresh weekly publication.

As to your reprinting the papers in your serials, I have no objection, reserving to myself, of course, the right of using the materials, later on, in any way I may see it fit to use them.

As I am sure that you will not suppress historical truth out of prejudice or party-consideration [...][3]

As to the latter point you will think it only just, that should any points be suppressed, which in my conviction are of decisive

historical importance, I shall consider myself obliged to stop the publication.

In thanking you for the serials you were so kind to send me, I cannot but regret that you did not think fit to communicate to me the proof-sheets of the 'Story of the life of Lord Palmerston'.[4]

Sentences, historical data, quotations from Palmerston's speeches—everything is so disfigured by *errata* that, in my opinion, the pamphlet, in its present form, is not only useless but positively mischievous.

A few words on the plan of the whole publication will suffice. I do not adopt the usual manner of opening the whole theme by general considerations, but on the contrary commence with facts.

In contradistinction to the usual manner of historical writers, I shall not commence this publication with general considerations, but with facts. The first chapter will be composed of despatches belonging to different epochs of that century, in order to show up the Russian spirit of English diplomacy during the 18th.[5]

I hope I need not tell you that I am no 'commercial' writer and that no [...][6]

[7][8]