---
id: MECW40-202
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, Between January 13 and 15 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "15 January 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40, p. 384; First published: abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, Moscow, "
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

Dear Engels,

If possible, let me have an article by Tuesday (I would then do next Friday's); this is crucial, as I'd like to be able to send Duncker my manuscript [*Contribution to Critique of Political Economy*] by Wednesday, which would be impossible unless I have Tuesday free.

The manuscript amounts to **about** 12 sheets of print (3 instalments) and — don't be bowled over by this — although entitled *Capital in General*, these instalments contain **nothing** as yet on the subject of capital, but only the two chapters: **1.** *The Commodity*, **2.** *Money or Simple Circulation*. As you can see, the part that was worked out in detail (in May, when I was staying with you) is not to appear at all yet. This is good on two counts. If the thing is a success, the third chapter on capital can follow very soon. Secondly, since the matter in the published part will, by its very nature, prevent the curs from confining their criticism solely to tendentious vituperation, and since the whole thing has an **exceedingly** serious and scientific air, the canaille will later on be compelled to take my views on capital **rather seriously**. Besides, I believe that, all practical considerations apart, the chapter on money will be of interest to experts.

I have had to alter your article on Bonaparte-Italy somewhat, having myself written about the same subject on Tuesday. Among the **agencies** which are egging Bonaparte on you forget Russia. Pam did not visit Paris for nothing, nor were the Russian **moves in Italy** without significance, nor yet Russia's coquetry with Bonaparte since the Peace of Paris. If Russia does no more than compel the Austrians, through Bonaparte, to sack their minister Buol and replace him with a Pan-Slav Russian agent, she will have achieved a great deal.

As Berlin correspondent I have promised an article on the *Prussian army* which you might do **one of these days**.

*In the American press Ruge is emerging as the fanatical champion of the Prince of Prussia. Schramm* has been given permission to return to Prussia (the warrant against him having been withdrawn) and to appear before a new jury without undergoing preventive detention.

Your
K. M.