---
id: MECW40-082
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 24, 1857"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 July 1857"
year: 1857
publication: "First published in *Marx and Engels, Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 24 July 1857

Dear Engels,

Received the *Cyclopaedia* stuff To-DAY.[1]

If at all possible will you send me some money? On Monday I'm threatened with the BROKER on account of rates and LANDLORD. Besides this the total WANT OF CASH during the past fortnight has made it impossible to obtain the small COMFORTS the doctor has prescribed for my wife, whose RECOVERY is very slow—indeed, she would seem to be getting weaker every day.

During this time I have been trying with conspicuous lack of success either to discount a bill or, as is quite customary in London, to raise a LOAN from a LOAN SOCIETY.[2] The latter operation calls for two respectable guarantors and my attempts to find them have been a total failure.

The money outstanding to me from the *Tribune* is so insignificant that I cannot think of drawing a bill on them for another 2 weeks. It would have been more if, on the one hand, I hadn't been previously compelled to overdraw and, on the other, the troubles at home had not caused some loss of earnings.

Nothing could be more distasteful to me than to burden you with my woes during your illness, but I'm so completely isolated that there is nothing else I can do.

I trust that, at the seaside, you will soon recuperate. Don't forget to let me have your address straight away.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Have attended to the enclosed letter for Imandt.