---
id: MECW40-196
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 17, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "17 December 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 17 December [1858]

DEAR Frederick,

£ 2 received with THANKS.

I knew about Blind's confection (just the kind of thing, as he told me himself, that Hecker used to do), although I wasn't, of course, aware of some of the nicer details. *D'abord,* this *Telegraph Morning Express* is edited by several English Seilers, and all its telegraphic despatches, or at any rate the better part of them, are *reprinted* from London morning papers. I can vouch for the FACT that Blind smuggled a bogus *TELEGR. DESPATCH*[1] into *The Morning Advertiser.* This was, OF COURSE, instantly appropriated by the *Telegraph Morning Express.* Secondly, Dr Bronner is not merely *an* but *the* agent of Blind, [he] having 'no other' to send. I also believe it was he himself who 'decreed' that [the missive] be sent to Lupus, since Bronner never does anything [without] official sanction. In today's *Daily Telegraph* also, you will find in the letter from Berlin: *'Similar petitions have been presented to the (Holstein) Diet by the German merchants resident at Bradford and Liverpool.'* The industry of these little Baden fleas hatched in the democratic midden is touching. Even the Ancients indulged in sundry edifying reflections on the subject of flea jumps.

I've had a satisfying experience with the *Tribune.* For months that rotten sheet had published as LEADERS all my articles on China[2] (a complete history of Anglo-Chinese trade,[3] etc.) and had even been complimented on them. But when the *official* text of the Anglo-Chinese treaty[4] was finally released, I wrote an article[5] in which I said *inter alia* that the Chinese 'would now legalise the import of opium, likewise put an IMPORT DUTY on opium and, LASTLY, might even permit the cultivation of opium actually in China', and thus the SECOND OPIUM WAR' would SOONER OR LATER deal a DEADLY BLOW to the English OPIUM TRADE, and notably to the INDIAN EXCHEQUER. WELL! Mr Dana printed this article as being from an OCCASIONAL CORRESPONDENT in London, and himself wrote a bombastic LEADER *refuting* his OCCASIONAL CORRESPONDENT[6] NOW, [the day before yesterday] (on *Monday,* RATHER), my predictions were confirmed *word for word* in the HOUSE OF COMMONS by Fitzgerald and Stanley in the name of the Ministry.[7] So on Tuesday, qua OCCASIONAL CORRESPONDENT I wrote a SOMEWHAT mocking though, of course, restrained piece about my castigator.

Apropos. My brother-in-law,[8] a tall and tedious if worthy Dutchman, is coming up to Manchester on business. And notably to ascertain the solvency of certain individuals. Send me *your private address,* as he wishes to contact you. But avoid any allusion to my PRIVATE AFFAIRS.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Little by little philistine Freiligrath is coughing up sundry things about Gottfried.[9] 1. that Gottfried is sending Gerstenberg to see various MERCHANTS in the City, suggesting they subscribe to the *Hermann.* After all, says he, the poor man has got to 'live' and make up for the **loss** incurred through the death of his wife. 2. He tells me that Gottfried, immediately after the Mockel woman's death, approached him and asked whether (and how big) *a deal* might be done with Cotta over her literary estate. 'After all', says Gottfried, 'I enjoy *the favour* of the public' It could be that Blind himself is again hoodwinking *The Morning Advertiser* and getting friend *Schütz* to send bogus telegraphic despatches from Brussels.

*Cluss* has married someone he met at Dr Wiss's in Baltimore. *Apropos,* on the strength of Blind's recommendation, Bronner has found Landolphe the *grec*[10] a schoolmaster's post in Bradford.

Mr *Liebknecht* has introduced Edgar Bauer into the Workers' Society.50 I WATCH HIM.