---
id: MECW40-058
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 9, 1857"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "9 April 1857"
year: 1857
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 9 April 1857

9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill

Dear Engels,

You must excuse me for being so late in answering. For a fortnight my wife has been in worse health than for many months

past, and there has been great TROUBLE in the house. Be so good as to let me have Dana's letter back.

I am sending you through the parcels company a small bottle of eye lotion. Cornelius brought me a bottle of it from Paris, where he had had trouble with his eyes. For several weeks I had myself been suffering from inflammation of the eyes due to intensive work at night. The lotion put me right within a few days and will do you a similar service. All you have to do is put a few drops into the bad eye on getting up and on going to bed.

Conrad Schramm has died in Philadelphia of a chest complaint. I hear that in New York the *Neue Zeit* announcing his death has published an obituary of sorts. I haven't yet seen it.[1]

The apparent improvement on the Stock Exchanges is again petering out. Bank rate is rising again. Crédit mobilier[2] and French *rentes* are again going DOWN, while revelations of commer- cial sharp practice by joint stock companies in London and Paris are becoming increasingly frequent. In the latter place, I'm glad to say, the government is directly involved. You have, I sup- pose, read about the row between Péreire and Féline? I'd have copied it out for you had I not assumed that *The Manchester Guardian's* [woman] correspondent CHRONICLES everything of that nature. I now see the Paris *Figaro* from time to time, the only *real* journal of the Empire; it has cast off all semblance of respectability.

I don't know whether I have already drawn your attention to the two new pieces of evidence against Pam. First, Herbert told his CONSTITUENTS in *South Wilts*;[3] that he had given orders for the bombardment of Odessa[4] upon his resigning, Pam sent an order written with his own hand to SPARE it. Secondly, Russell told the City electorate[5] that Palmerston had given him written instructions on how to conduct himself at the Congress of Vienna,[6]

instructions which Clarendon forbade him to make public and in the execution of which LITTLE JOHN so splendidly BROKE DOWN. It's typical of old Pam to keep harping in *his* newspapers on Herbert's Odessa TREASON (it was Pam's popular rag, the *Advertiser,* that first drew attention to Herbert's family ties with Vorontsov)[7] and on Russell's Vienna TREASON.[8]

I shall search out more anti-Palmerstoniana for you. Pam's speech against Anstey (a fat pamphlet) ought to be in my possession if Pieper hasn't pinched it from me. Lengthier works are Parish, *Diplomatic History of Greece* and Urquhart, *Central Asia.*[9] On the first topic you might also read the EXPOSITIONS by Thiersch[10] and Maurenbrecher[11] which came out in 1836 (?). (It's a long time since I set eyes on them.) Of all the *Blue Books,*[12] the one that has impressed me most strongly is that on the second Syro-Turkish War.[13]

I've only had 5 articles in *The Free Press.*?[14] Liebknecht, etc., have filched them from me. However I'll get them together for you. In the last one I used the text of one of your articles, in which you speak of Peter I. I've only just completed the introduction. But at first the chaps dragged their feet for months. Later, they brought it out rather more quickly. But now, when the first payment is due, I dun them in vain. If they don't do better on this POINT than hitherto, I shall have to sever the CONNECTION ALTOGETHER. They have given me a new contract, but what good is a contract to me if they don't abide by it *in puncto puncti*[15]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Regards to Lupus. Tell him that in Grimm[16] I have found the scientific derivation of Farina, the Eau de Cologne manufacturer, viz. Sanscrit: *vâri*[17] —Gen. *vârinas.*