---
id: MECW40-285
title: "Letter to Bertalan Szemere, September 26, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 September 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published in *Revue d'histoire compareé,* t. IV, Nos. 1-2, 1946 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

MARX TO BERTALAN SZEMERE[1]

IN PARIS

London, 26 September 1859

My dear Franck,

In reply to your letter d.d. Sept. 23 I beg to state: 1) On the arrival at London of the *N. Y.* T. containing P's declaration, which to sign with his name he had not dared,[2] I sent the *N. Y. T.* two letters with a full Statement of the case. Simultaneously, I addressed a *private note* to the Editor in which I insisted upon the necessity of exposing the manoeuvres and intrigues of the wide-mouthed charlatan.[3] *We shall, by and by, ascertain, whether or not my letters were published by the N. Y.* T.

As to the great London Daily Papers, it is quite out of the question to induce them to give publicity to a full exposure of Kossuth. The statement, in the first instance, would imply a *libel case,* which to stand the editors are, or at least affect to be, afraid of, considering the difficulty to prove such charges of bribery, and to summon the witnesses before a British tribunal. In the second instance, Kossuth is too unmitigated a humbug to not share the secret sympathies of the venal London press-gang. I have, however, put down a summary for the **Free Press** (the Urquhartite paper which appears on the last Wednesday of every month)[4] I have authorised them, if they think it necessary, 'to dress the salad' in their own style, and I think myself warranted in supposing that the 'thing' is to come out *this very week.* In that case I shall forward you a copy. Although circulated among a very exclusive public, the *Free Press* finds its way to all the cabinets and capitals of Europe. It is well known at Constantinople. Besides, the statement having once appeared in the *Free Press,* some London correspondents, connected with the German press, and more or less influenced by me, will find it easier to transplant the thing to the Teutonic soil.

I enclose Asboth's declaration from the *N. Y.* T.[5] The turn now given to K's proceedings is, that that 'illustrious' patriot attempted only to prevent 'a premature *rising* in Hungary', and that the clever 'statesman' altogether succeeded in this 'difficult' task.

Some time ago, Urquhart had his correspondence with Kossuth (which I alluded to, as you will recollect) translated into Italian, and copiously distributed throughout Italy.[6]

2) *In regard to the wine-affair,* I became informed, soon after your departure from London, that my brother-in-law[7] was not to return to Amsterdam before October. I have, therefore, *not yet* written to him on the business.

*For England* I have till now vacillated between two men, both of whom, though in different ways, appear fit for undertaking the task. The one is a German, without capital, but very energetical, speculative, and industrious. The other is an Englishman, who deals in French and German wines, a **respectable** merchant, although no large one. At all events, he has contrived to get on with his wine-business and to rise, in the short period of 6-7 years, from very small beginnings to comparative affluency. The former candidate would have been exclusively given to the business in question; the latter has the advantage of greater means, a settled concern, and established connexions. If, as will be decided in a few days, the German is, for the present, not yet ready to enter on the affair (and I have reason to think so), I shall make a conditional offer to the Englishman. You will then be informed of his conditions and may decide yourself.

Yours truly

A. Williams[8]

*P.S.* At this moment I receive your second letter. I think it is already answered by the preceding lines.

*27. Sep.* The proof-sheet of the 'thing' in the *Free Press* has been forwarded to me.