---
id: MECW40-172
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, June 9, 1858"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 June 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 9 June 1858

Dear Moor,

I return Lassalle's letter herewith.[1] Borchardt had already told me on Saturday with a look of triumph that our little Jew Braun had been in a brawl. It's extremely useful to know these details. As for our opinion, it's as clear as day that, by making so despicable an attempt on a person's life, both the gentlemen, the *Intendantur- rat* no less than the *Assessor,* have adopted *in toto* the standpoint of the bludgeon, and that the only duel one *might* engage in with such laddies has already *taken place* during the brawl itself. If 2 chaps waylay a third and *both* of them set on him, I don't believe that any duelling code in the world would *permit* a subsequent duel with such riff-raff. If Mr Fabrice intended forcibly to provoke a duel by means of the horse-whip affair, either Mr Bor mann ought to have looked on purely passively as a *witness,* or his presence was altogether superfluous. But when two men simultaneously set upon *one,* then we are dealing with *canaille*[2] for whom honour and FAIR PLAY do not exist and who have given proof that A FAIR DUEL cannot be fought with them. Indeed one would run the risk of being treacherously murdered.

So much for my own and Lupus' opinion, if we are to take the duelling code as the basis in law.

This apart we share your view that 1. duels are, on the whole, untimely for revolutionaries just now and 2. that Lassalle, having declared himself unequivocally against duelling 'on principle', would be greatly discredited were he now to engage in a duel.

So far as we are concerned, therefore, you can safely go ahead and tell our Ephraim Artful[3] not to fight but rather tranquilly restore his 'unshakable determination' with the help of the botde, take the moon by the horns again as soon as may be and risk annihilation for the hundred and first time. As to the discovery that he appears to possess an adequate store of vanity, silence is, I think, the best form of congratulation.

Did you read the story about Fould's son?[4] He decamped to London with Mademoiselle Valérie[5] of the Gymnase and 1,600,000 francs. His old man[6] wrote to Pélissier and told him that he should *au cas de besoin, user d'autorité.*[7] Pélissier invited the loving couple to *déjeuner*[8] and told them: *Je vous donne ma bénédiction*[9] and wrote to the old man: *Que voulez-vous? Les jeunes gens seront toujours de jeunes gens!*[10] Whereat old Fould became the laughing-stock of Paris.

Your

F. E.