---
id: MECW40-267
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 18, 1859"
volume: 40
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "18 July 1859"
year: 1859
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 18 July 1859

Dear Moor,

I shall send you tomorrow or the day after the £5 still required to pay off the *Volk's* arrears. It was too late for me to do it today, and besides I have the company of the 'little man', *scilicet*[1]

Dronke, who sidled up to me at the Exchange; the little chap's business seems to be doing passably well. Apart from current day-to-day gossip, on which he holds forth like a pothouse politician, he seems reluctant to talk about *politicis,* particularly of the past, and this I encourage, for after all I treat him as an *extraneus.*[2] His knowledge, however, has not increased, and the profundity of his politics may be summed up in his remark that the Italians 'have *got* to hit out *now,* or they're not worth a thing'.

But to revert from the little man to the *Volk;* we must at once discuss what is to be done. If the £7 you took with you has vanished so quickly, and the louts' £3 15/- as well, the £3 I have in reserve will doubtless soon be gone too. *Que faire?*[3] I've heard nothing about Strohn's return. There's not much more to be done with Borchardt. As soon as Lupus returns—but heaven knows where he is—I shall at all events get him to carry out a reconnaissance. Before that I wouldn't care to approach him personally. Nor do I run across him any more, though I've several times kept half an eye open for him in Oxford Road.

At any rate you must let me know sometime exactly how matters stand financially under the new administration, so that I can have an answer ready to eventual queries. How many copies are now being sold? Have you cut down the newsboys, etc., to *1*/*2'**d***** per copy? What do the total weekly expenses amount to and what is the income—hence what is the deficit?**

Mr Thimm has been talked round very nicely. *Das Volk* is now displayed in his window IN A CONSPICUOUS POSITION, a much better one than the *Hermann* and the *KOJIOKOJIK,* which flank it. A few more 'Gatherings' and the last-named[4] will doubtless be done for altogether.[5] The way in which Kinkel has suddenly taken to his heels is very funny.[6]

Next week's LEADER on the peace ought to be done by you. It's important, I think, since we've been lucky enough to get hold of the secret articles,[7] that this point be fully exploited. As you are making a *Tribune* article[8] out of it anyway, that should be easy for you. This point may well give the *Volk* a significance of quite a tlifferent order, and *exact* for it a position in the press. Think this over.

Let me know also *by return* what you people would like me to write about this week; then I shall do it on Wednesday evening.

I have sent for the *Portfolio* and am studying these and other Russian documents and Palmerstoniana; shall also get hold of as many BACK NUMBERS of *The Free Press* as possible. It's really high time I went through the stuff, seeing what importance the thing is now assuming. Can you tell me where the Russian memorandum on Russian policy?[9] originated and which Prussian ministerial crisis brought it to the light of day[10] So far as I am concerned the internal EVIDENCE and the classic phraseology are, of course, more than sufficient, but I need these FACTS for the debate with Philistia; anyway it is stupid of Urquhart to be so unnecessarily secretive.

Is there anything to be wormed out of Blind *quoad*?[11] Vogt[12] The 'little man' doesn't believe the thing, of course, and asks 'why, then, didn't *we* see to it that the documents were printed'?

Generally speaking the documents in Vol. 1 of the *Portfolio* are not the most important, though there are some nice things among them, particularly those by Pozzo di Borgo and the memorandum to the German governments.[13] What idiots they are and how the Russians must laugh at them!

The memorandum in *The Free Press* is a true classic from start to finish, including the almost comical way in which the worthy diplomats make out that regicide is at once self-sacrifice and a republican virtue. Still, it seems to be going a bit far when Nicholas[14] gives his son[15] this kind of lesson with regard to the murder of his own father; I should say this passage has been altered.[16]

Is it not possible to get hold of the complete document? Dronke tells me that in Glasgow there is a STATIONER by the name of Love in St. Enoch Square who sells the *Hermann* and would be a very suitable man to sell *Das Volk.* It might be a good idea to send him a few copies and a letter.

Have you sent it to America? It's about time you did. T o Weydemeyer, Steffen and the chap in New York[17] who once wrote to you about communist matters.[18]

Warmest regards to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.