---
id: MECW21-040
title: "General Council Resolution on the Federal Committee of Romance Switzerland. The General Council to the Romance Federal Committee"
volume: 21
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "29 June 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published in *Le Mirabeau*, No. 53,  July 24, 1870 Printed according to the newspaper Translated from the French Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 21"
status: raw
---

After the Egalité editorial board was reorganised (see Note 158), the Bakuninists, attempting to retain their lost positions, had secured a formal majority of votes at a regular congress of the Romance Federation held in La Chaux-de-Fonds on April 4-6, 1870. The congress discussed the attitude of the working class to the political struggle. In contrast to the Geneva sections, the Bakuninists advocated abstention from the political struggle, referring to the French text of the Rules (see this volume, pp. 89-90). On Bakunin's insistence, the congress began its proceedings with the admission of the newly formed sections to the federation. A sharp struggle arose over the admission of the section named "Alliance of Socialist Democracy—Central Section" (see Note 55) and the Chaux-de-Fonds pro-Bakunin section. Utin, one of the leaders of the Russian Section in Geneva, exposed Bakunin's schismatic activities. A split occurred; the Geneva delegates and other General Council supporters continued their work independently. An announcement about the Chaux-deFonds split was published in L'Égalité on April 9, 1870.

The Bakuninists elected a new Federal Committee and transferred its seat to La Chaux-de-Fonds. Thus two Federal committees appeared in Romance Switzerland — in Geneva and in La Chaux-de-Fonds. The Bakuninists started publication of a newspaper, La Solidarité, that appeared under the editorship of James Guillaume, first in Neuchâtel (April 11, 1870-May 12, 1871), and then in Geneva. It was, in fact, a continuation of Le Progrès.

On April 12, 1870 the General Council, having received the news about the events at the congress instructed Hermann Jung to gather more particulars. Jung brought them to the attention of the Council in April and May. At the request of the Geneva Committee members, the Council discussed the split at the Chaux-de-Fonds congress on June 28 and passed a resolution (for the record of Marx's speech on the question see this volume, p. 446). It was sent to the two Federal Committees by Jung, the Corresponding Secretary for Switzerland, and published in La Solidarité, No. 16, July 23 and Le Mirabeau, No. 53, July 24, 1870, over his signature.

In English the resolution was first published in The General Council of the First International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966.

THE GENERAL COUNCIL TO THE ROMANCE

FEDERAL COMMITTEE

Considering,

That although a majority of delegates at the Chaux-de-Fonds Congress elected a new Romance Federal Committee, this majority was only nominal;

That the Romance Federal Committee in Geneva, having always fulfilled its obligations to the General Council and to the International Working Men's Association, and having always acted in conformity with the Association's Rules, the General Council does not have the right to relieve it of its title,

The General Council, at its meeting of June 28, 1870, unanimously resolved that the Romance Federal Committee residing in Geneva shall retain its title, and that the Federal Committee residing in Chaux-de-Fonds shall select another, local title of its own choosing.

In the name and by order of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association,

H. Jung,

Secretary for Switzerland

London, June 29, 1870