---
id: MECW21-048
title: "Remarks On the Programme and Rules of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy"
volume: 21
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "15 December 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published, in Russian, in Generalny Sovet Pervogo Internatsionala. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1964 First published in English in The General Council of the First International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966. "
status: raw
---

Note from MECW vol. 21 :

Marx made these remarks on the Programme and Rules of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy probably on December 15, 1868, the day when the General Council of the International Working Men's Association discussed the admission of the Alliance into the International and instructed Marx to prepare an answer. The remarks were written in the right and left margins of a French leaflet containing the Programme and Rules. Marx underlined certain words and phrases  and in some places drew vertical lines in the margins [here marked in bold]. (The names of Jules Johannard and Eugène Dupont, who had read the Programme and taken part in its discussion, were written in the margin by Jung.) The same day Marx sent this document to Engels asking for his opinion. Taking into account Engels' ideas, Marx drew up a circular letter "The International Working Men's Association and the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy" which was approved by the General Council on December 22, 1868. Marx's comments on the Programme and Rules of the Alliance were

Notes made in the margin of a leaflet containing the rules and program of the International Alliance of Socialist Democracy

*Jules Johannard*

*Eugene Dupont*[4]

The paper will appear once a week.

Subscriptions cost:

one year: 6 fr.

six months: 3 fr. 50

On behalf of the provisional Central Bureau:

Secretary,

JEAN ZAGORSKY

8 Rue Montbrilliant

N.B. The national bureaus are requested to send the Central Bureau the money received for the shares and subscriptions before January 1.