---
id: MECW21-016
title: "Statement to the German Workers Educational Society in London (November 1868)"
volume: 21
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 November 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 21, p. 32; First published: in Briefe und Auszuge aus Briefen von J. Ph. Becker, J. Dietzgen, F. Engels, K. Marx u. A. an F. A. Sorge u, A., Stuttgart, 1906"
status: raw
---

The reason for Marx's statement to the *German Workers' Educational Society in London *was the Society's attitude towards the Lassallean Berlin Congress of 1868 and towards the workers' organisation founded by Bebel and Liebknecht at the Nuremberg Congress. On November 23, 1868 Marx wrote to Engels: "Imported from Paris and Germany, the Lassalleans, who are in secret contact with Schweitzer, took advantage of the absence of Lessner because of his wile's illness to obtain a vote of confidence in *Schweitzer *against the Nuremberg people". Subsequently, Marx supported Lessner in his struggle against the Lassallean elements in the Society.
The *German Workers' Educational Society in London *was founded in 1840 by German worker refugees, members of the League of the Just. After the founding of the Communist League in 1847, representatives of its local communities played the leading role in the Society, which had branches in various working-class districts in London. In 1847 Marx and in 1849-50 Engels took an active part in the Society's work, but in September 1850 they temporarily withdrew because the Willich-Schapper sectarian-adventurist group had increased its influence in the Society. In the late 1850s when Marx's followers (Georg Eccarius, Friedrich Lessner, Karl Schapper, who had renounced his sectarian views, and others) prevailed again, Marx and Engels resumed their activities in the Educational Society. When the International Working Men's Association was established, the Society became its German section in London. Many, of its members — Eccarius, Kaub, Lessner, Lochner, Bolleter and others — were on the General (Central) Council of the International and played a prominent role in its activity. The Society existed until 1918, when it was closed by the British Government.

To Mr G. Speyer, Secretary of the German Workers' Educational Society

Dear friend,

I have been informed that the Society has decided to issue a circular letter to the German workers, the theme of which is said to be the "mass unification of the German workers of South and North in consequence of the Berlin Congress of September 26".[1]

In these circumstances I am obliged to announce my *resignation from the Workers' Society.*

Such a letter is obviously intended as, or implies, a public alignment of the London German Workers' Educational Society *for Schweitzer* and his organisation and *against* the organisation of the Nuremberg Congress,[2] which embraces most of South Germany and various parts of North Germany. As I am known in Germany as a member of the Society, in fact its oldest member, *I* would be held responsible for this step in spite of all possible assurances to the contrary.

You must, however, realise that I cannot accept such responsibility.

*Firstly:* During the disputes between the Nuremberg organisation, represented by Liebknecht, Bebel, etc., and the Berlin organisation, represented by Schweitzer, both parties have contacted me in writing. I have replied that as the Secretary of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association for Germany I have to maintain an *impartial* position. I have advised both parties, if they cannot and will not amalgamate with each other, to look for ways and means of working for the common goal peacefully *side by side.*

*Secondly:* In reply to a letter from Herr von Schweitzer to me, I have set out for him in detail the reasons why I can neither approve the manner in which the Berlin Congress was managed nor the statutes adopted by it.[3]

*Thirdly:* The Nuremberg Congress has affiliated itself *directly* to the International Working Men's Association. The Hamburg Congress — of which the Berlin Congress was a continuation — has *only indirectly* affiliated itself by a statement of sympathy, owing to the obstacles placed in its path by the Prussian legislation. In spite of these obstacles, however, the newly formed Democratic Workers' Association of Berlin,[4] which belongs to the Nuremberg organisation, has publicly and officially affiliated itself to the International Working Men's Association.

I repeat that in these circumstances the decision of the Society leaves me no other choice than to announce my resignation from it. I trust you will be so kind as to convey these lines of mine to the Society.

Yours sincerely,
Karl Marx