---
id: MECW21-043
title: "Confidential Communication to All Sections of the IWMA"
volume: 21
doc_type: chapter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 July 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published in Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960  Printed according to the manuscript Translated from the French Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 21"
status: raw
---

This confidential communication was drawn up by Marx in connection with preparations for the next congress of the International scheduled for September 5, 1870 in Mainz. At the General Council meeting on June 28, 1870 Marx proposed that the sections of the Association should discuss the change of the seat of the General Council so as to avoid creating privileged conditions for workers of one or another country. Although adopted, Marx's proposition was objected to by Hales, a General Council member. The Council resumed the debate on July 5 and 12 and turned down Hales' objections. On July 14 Marx sent Hermann Jung the French text of the confidential communication and a letter in English (see present edition, Vol. 43) to be forwarded to Switzerland, with one reservation: "The following must not be published but only communicated by letter to the different sections." Also extant is the text sent to De Paepe by Auguste Serraillier, Corresponding Secretary for Belgium. The sections opposed any change of the Council's seat, considering London the most suitable place for the leading body of the International Working Men's Association.

The document was first published in Russian in Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 16, Moscow, 1960 and in English in The General Council of the First International. 1868-1870, Moscow, 1966.

1) The General Council requests all sections to give their delegates formal instructions concerning the advisability of changing the venue of the General Council for 1870-71.

2) In the event of agreement on the change, the General Council will propose Brussels as the venue for the General Council that year.