---
id: MECW21-013
title: "Connections between the International Working Men's Association and English Working Men's Organisations"
volume: 21
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "4 October 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 21, p. 25; First published: in Demokratisches Wochenblatt, October 17, 1868."
status: raw
---

At its meeting of September 29, 1868 the General Council of the International Working Men's Association discussed, among other things, Hirsch's statement that all the principal trade unions of England had withdrawn from the Association. To refute this slander Marx wrote this item for the *Demokratisches Wochenblatt *(see his letter to Engels of October 4, 1868). The editors presumably made changes in the first paragraph.
This item was first published in English in *The General Council of the first International. 1868-1870, Moscow, *1966.

The unusual seriousness with which the English and particularly the London press treats the *International Working Men's Association* and its *Brussels Congress* (*The Times* alone devoted four leading articles to it) has stirred up a real devil's sabbath in the German bourgeois press. It, the German press, takes the English press to task for its error in believing that such importance is attached to the International Working Men's Association in England! It has discovered that the English trades unions, which, through the International Working Men's Association, have given considerable financial support to the Paris, Geneva and Belgian workers in their fight against capital,[1] have absolutely *no* connection with that very same International Working Men's Association!

"Apparently all this is based," we have in writing from London, "on the assertion of a certain *M. Hirsch* [reference is to Dr. Max Hirsch, the "famous" economist of the Duncker *Volks-Zeitung*. Until his voyage of discovery into the English unknown, apparently no one in London had any idea of the existence of this new saviour of society] whom Schulze-Delitzsch sent specially to London to kick up such a fuss. *M. Hirsch* says so, and M. *Hirsch* is an honourable man! The honourable Hirsch aroused the suspicions of London trade unionists because [he] bore no letters of recommendation from the International Working Men's Association. They simply *made a fool of him.* No wonder then that Hirsch got it all wrong. If he had been taken seriously, he could have been told, without being entrusted with anything really confidential, what the whole of London knows that the General Council of trades unions in London)[2] consists of six or seven people, of whom three, *Odger* (Secretary of the General Trades Council and shoemakers' delegate), *R. Applegarth* (delegate of the Amalgamated Carpenters and Joiners) and *Howell* (delegate of the bricklayers and Secretary of the Reform League[3], are at the same time members of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association. He would have discovered further that the rest of the affiliated trades unions (there are about 50 in London alone, not counting the provincial trades unions) are represented on the General Council of the International Working Men's Association by another *five members,* namely, *R. Shaw, Buckley, Colin, Hales* and *Maurice;* furthermore every union has the right and makes a practice of sending delegates to the General Council for special purposes. Further, the following English organisations are represented on the General Council of the International Working Men's Association:

"*co-operative societies,* which sent three delegates [Frederick Dean, a smith, John Foster Sr, a carpenter, and John Foster Jr mechanic — all members of co-operative societies in Hull] to the Brussels Congress, by *Wlm.* [John] *Weston* and *Williams;*

"the *Reform League,* by *Dell, Cowell Stepney* and *Lucraft,* all three are also on the Executive Committee of the Reform League;

"the *National Reform Association,*[4] set up by the late agitator Bronterre O'Brien, by its President *A. A. Walton* and *Milner;*

"lastly, the *atheist* popular movement by its famous orator Mrs. *Harriet Law* and *Mr. Copeland.*

"It is clear that not one significant organisation of the British proletariat exists which is not directly, by its own leaders, represented on the General Council of the International Working Men's Association. Finally, there is *The Bee-Hive,* under *George Potter's* management, the official organ of the English trades unions, which is at the same time the official organ of the General Council of the International Working Men's Association, on whose meetings it reports weekly.

"The discoveries of the honourable Hirsch and the subsequent jubilation in the German bourgeois press have provided just the right fodder for the London correspondent of the *Weser-Zeitung* and the London correspondent of the *Augsburgerin*, who signs himself D. This person — for one and the same person writes for the two papers — lives, for reasons best known to himself, in a remote corner a few hours away from London. There he coyly culls his extracts from *The Times, The Morning Star* and *The Saturday Review,* and serves them up with an aesthetic fish sauce to suit the taste of his public. From time to time, as is the case here, he also digs up the gossip of German papers and has it reprinted under a false date in the *Weser-Zeitung* and the *Augsburgerin.* The said correspondent of the *Weser-Zeitung* and the *Augsburgerin* is none other than the notorious literary lumpen proletarian *Elard Biscamp.* Long rejected by any decent society, this unfortunate seeks consolation in the bottle for the broken heart caused him by Prussia annexing his native Hesse-Cassel as well as his friend *Edgar Bauer*."[5]