---
id: MECW24-038
title: "The Programme of the Parti Ouvrier (1880)"
volume: 24
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "May 1880"
year: 1880
publication: "This document was drawn up in May 1880, when French workers' leader Jules Guesde came to visit Marx in London. The programme was adopted, with certain amendments, by the founding congress of the Parti"
status: raw
---

Note from MIA :

Concerning the programme Marx wrote: "this very brief document in its economic section consists solely of demands that actually have spontaneously arisen out of the labour movement itself. There is in addition an introductory passage where the communist goal is defined in a few lines."[1] Engels described the first, maximum section, as "a masterpiece of cogent argumentation rarely encountered, clearly and succinctly written for the masses; I myself was astonished by this concise formulation"[2] and he later recommended the economic section to the German social democrats in his critique of the draft of the 1891 Erfurt Programme.[3]

After the programme was agreed, however, a clash arose between Marx and his French supporters arose over the purpose of the minimum section. Whereas Marx saw this as a practical means of agitation around demands that were achievable within the framework of capitalism, Guesde took a very different view: "Discounting the possibility of obtaining these reforms from the bourgeoisie, Guesde regarded them not as a practical programme of struggle, but simply ... as bait with which to lure the workers from Radicalism." The rejection of these reforms would, Guesde believed, "free the proletariat of its last reformist illusions and convince it of the impossibility of avoiding a workers '89."[4] Accusing Guesde and Lafargue of "revolutionary phrase-mongering" and of denying the value of reformist struggles, Marx made his famous remark that, if their politics represented Marxism, "*ce qu'il y a de certain c'est que moi, je ne suis pas Marxiste*" ("what is certain is that I myself am not a Marxist").[5]

The introductory, maximum section of the PO programme appears in the Penguin collection of Marx's political writings, *The First International and After,* in a translation from the German text in the *Marx-Engels Werke*. So far as we know the rest of the programme has not been published in English before. The translation which appears here is from the original French version in Jules Guesde, *Textes Choisis, 1867-1882,* Editions sociales, 1959, pp.117-9. We are grateful to Bernie Moss for providing a copy of the text.

Note from MECW vol. 24 :

After the socialist congress held in Marseilles in October 1879 set up the French Workers' Party (Parti Ouvrier Français), a group of French socialists headed by Jules Guesde addressed Marx and Engels, through Paul Lafargue, requesting them to help to draft an electoral programme of the French Workers' Party. Its preamble was formulated by Marx who dictated it to Guesde. Engels wrote to Eduard Bernstein about it on October 25, 1881: "A masterpiece of cogent reasoning, calculated to explain things to the masses in a few words". Marx and Engels also took part in drawing up the practical section of the programme (the minimum programme).

The programme was first published in Le Précurseur, No. 25, June 19, 1880; however, Malon adulterated some of its tenets and "introduced sundry changes for the worse", Engels wrote to Eduard Bernstein on October 20, 1882. The preamble in L'Égalité, No. 24, June 30, 1880 was probably printed from Guesde's notes. The programme appeared also in Le Prolétaire, July 10, 1880, La Revue socialiste, No. 10, July 20, 1880, and in a number of other French newspapers.

In 1880, the electoral programme was adopted as "the minimum programme" of the French Workers' Party at the Havre Congress. Its first separate edition appeared in Paris in 1883 under the title Le Programme du Parti Ouvrier.

In English, the preamble was published in full for the first time in: Marx, Engels, The Socialist Revolution, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1981, pp. 252-53.

Considering,

That the emancipation of the productive class is that of all human beings without distinction of sex or race;

That the producers can be free only when they are in possession of the means of production;[6]

That there are only two forms under which the means of production can belong to them

Considering,

That this collective appropriation can arise only from the revolutionary action of the productive class – or proletariat - organized in a distinct political party;

That a such an organization must be pursued by all the means the proletariat has at its disposal including universal suffrage which will thus be transformed from the instrument of deception that it has been until now into an instrument of emancipation;

The French socialist workers, in adopting as the aim of their efforts the political and economic expropriation of the capitalist class and the return to community of all the means of production, have decided, as a means of organization and struggle, to enter the elections with the following immediate demands: