---
id: MECW24-052
title: "Letter to the Editor of the Freiheit, July 22, 1881"
volume: 24
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 July 1881"
year: 1881
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXVII, 1935 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 24"
status: raw
---

Note from MECW :

On July 20, 1881 Norris A. Clowes, the New-York Star correspondent, asked Engels to write a review of the British labour movement. Being pressed for time, Engels referred him to his articles which The Labour Standard was at the time publishing as editorials. In response to Clowes' stated wish to enter into communication with Most, Engels advised him to write to the Freiheit editorial board. In this letter to the Freiheit, which is printed according to the manuscript, Engels informs the editorial board about this. The letter is written in German and English.

This letter was first published in the original in MEGA2, Abt. I, Bd. 25, Berlin, 1985, S. 274.

[London,] July 22, 1881

To the Editor of the "Freiheit"

Mr. Norris A. Clowes, the New York Star's correspondent in Ireland, who has been recommended to me from America,[1] has written as follows:

* "If Herr Most would like to make any statement to the New York Star public, I should be glad to give him the opportunity."*

To which I replied:

* "If you wish to enter into communication with Mr. Most, you had better write to the Editor[2] of the Freiheit, 252 Tottenham Court Road, W. London, who will be able to tell you whether such communication will be possible under present circumstances."*[3]

I hasten to bring this to your attention.

Yours faithfully,

F. E.