---
id: MECW41-127
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 26, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 November 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 26 November [1860]

Dear Frederick,

My wife's condition has improved, in so far as this is possible under the circumstances. It is going to be a lengthy business. What might be called the paroxysm of the disease is now over.

Allen believes that the only explanation for the infection is the state of extreme nervous excitation in which she has been these many months.

Perhaps you would be kind enough to ask Heckscher to send the enclosed to the **Reform** *without delay.*

The day before yesterday, Petsch actually advertised *Herr Vogt* in the *Hermann* and the *Athenaeum* as due to appear this week.[1]

From its date you will see that I scribbled the piece for the *Reform* as long ago as Saturday. I had intended to send it to you with an accompanying letter, but suddenly felt so unwell that any kind of writing was OUT OF QUESTION. Allen gave me some medicine, and today I feel all right again. Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.[2]

Sir,

Your acceptance of the following declaration would much oblige me. You will be receiving a copy of my anti-Vogt pamphlet in the course of next week. I am, Sir,

Your most obedient Servant,

Karl Marx

*To the Editorial Board of the* Reform

*Declaration*

At the beginning of February 1860 the editorial board of the *Reform* were kind enough to publish a declaration by myself[3] which began with these words:

'I hereby make it known that I have taken steps preparatory to instituting legal proceedings for libel against the Berlin *National- Zeitung* in connection with the leading articles in Nos. 37 and 41 regarding Vogt's pamphlet *Mein Prozess gegen die Allgemeine Zeitung.* I reserve the right to answer Vogt in writing at a later date.'

In the course of February 1860 I brought a libel suit in Berlin against *F. Zabel,* the responsible editor of the *National-Zeitung.* My lawyer, Legal Counsellor Weber, resolved at first on an *official investigation.* With a ruling of April 18, 1860 the Public Pros- ecutor^3 refused to 'take action' against F. Zabel, on the grounds that there was **no public interest** involved. On April 26, 1860 his refusal was confirmed by the Chief Public Prosecutor.

My lawyer then began *civil proceedings.* The Royal *Municipal Court* in a ruling of June 8, 1860 *prohibited* me from proceeding with my *lawsuit* on the grounds that the genuinely defamatory 'utterances and statements' of F. Zabel's were **merely quotations* from other persons', and that 'the intention to insult' was not present. The Royal *Court of Appeal* for its part declared in a ruling of July 11, 1860 that the alleged use of *quotation* did not affect the culpability of the articles, but that the defamatory passages contained in them did *not* refer to my ****person'.* Furthermore, 'in the present case' the intention to insult 'could not be assumed'. Thus, the Royal Court of Appeal confirmed the negative ruling of the Municipal Court. In a ruling of October 5, 1860, which I received on October 23 of this year, the Royal *Supreme Tribunal* found that 'in the present case' no 'legal error' on the part of the Royal Court of Appeal 'could be discerned'. The *prohibition on suing F. Zabel* was thus definitely sustained and my claim *did not reach the stage of being accorded a public hearing.*

My *reply to Vogt* will appear in a few days.

London, November 24, 1860

*Karl Marx*