---
id: MECW41-199
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 27, 1861"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "27 December 1861"
year: 1861
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41, p. 337; First published: abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Berlin, 1930."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 27 December 1861**

Dear Engels,

When the outside world first began to 'dun' me, I wrote — since I didn't want to be always pestering you — not only to my mother and other relations, but also to Siebel. Now that young man, as I see from his letter, has again written to you. Consider the matter as *non avenue*.

I am extremely vexed that you should have had to give Dronke an **I.O.U.** for my sake. Originally, he promised to arrange the matter in less onerous a form and to give longer **terms**.

I don't yet know quite how I am to weather this crisis. Whatever happens — since otherwise it would be plainly impossible — I shall write to **my landlord** and tell him that he cannot be paid *now,* that I intend to give him a bill, etc.

The court case is also going wrong. Since the point at issue turns on **partnership, my lawyer** considers it necessary — if I am not to be made to pay the £20 — that the case be removed from the **Sheriff's Court** and taken before a **Superior Court**. I am due to appear at the **Sheriff's Court** on January 3rd. My mistake lay in not having concluded a *written* contract with A. Petsch. Sidney, my attorney, believes I should be pretty safe in the **Superior Court**.

The rotten *Presse* is printing barely half my articles. They're jackasses. I wonder how they propose to pay, whether I'm expected to write individual articles on 'spec', or what?

In the meantime, may I wish you in advance every happiness for the New Year. If it's anything like the old one, I, for my part, would sooner consign it to the devil.

*Salut*.

Your
K. M.