---
id: MECW41-015
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, February 4, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 February 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 4 February 1860

D. M.,

One keeps changing one's mind every night as is inevitable, since we've not yet set eyes on the stuff.[1]

The Hirsch affair is truly splendid.[2]

The lawsuit in Berlin also strikes me as a very good idea, always assuming they allow it, though I don't see how they can deny you justice/

*Re* Lupus'[3] and the affair in general, I waded through the better part of the records for 1850/52 yesterday evening. Lupus cannot recollect anything at all and I have to keep jogging his memory. Not that I'm much better; since those days so much BITTER BEER has flowed down my gullet that many things are difficult to ascertain. As regards Lupus the following emerges:

1. In 1851, *not 1850,* when the document appeared in the *Karlsruher Zeitung* (our plan of campaign against the democrats)[4], Lupus was still in Zurich[5] *and was attacked by the fellows as one who happened to be in their midst and was a member of *our* League.[6] *

2. Another document, however, had appeared previously in, if I'm not mistaken, the *Hannoversche Zeitung,* namely a circular from the Cologne Central Authority composed by Bürgers.[7] But I can't ascertain exactly whether it happened in the *Hann. Ztg.* You must go into this.

3. Vogt has jumbled all of this up and has Lupus writing a document in *London* in 1850 which was produced in *Cologne* at a time when Lupus was still in Zurich. (L. came to London after 5 May and before 21 July 1851.) All that remains to be ascertained is whether Bürgers' document really did appear in the *Hann. Zeitung,* and how it fell into the hands of the Hanover police. The letters I wrote you between February and April 1851 are bound to contain some mention of it.[8] Let me have particulars about this; without them I hardly imagine that Lupus' statement[9] will suffice.

The item in *The Times* (original source Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung)* had already been noted.[10]

I am starting on my thing[11] today. Up till now, the Vogt rumpus has prevented me from doing so. This time I shall again describe myself as the 'author of *Po and Rhine'* so as to get that personage all the more firmly established in the field of military literature— if I put my own name to it *the immediate result would be a conspiration du silence.* At the same time, however, i.e. about a fortnight after it comes out, I shall get Siebel to arrange for an appropriate review to appear in the papers. In general, this fellow could be very useful to us in the Vogt rumpus; he has masses of connections.

Many regards to the FAMILY.

Your

F. E.