---
id: MECW41-212
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 6, 1862"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 May 1862"
year: 1862
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 May [1862]

Dear Frederick,

As soon as you have shown it to Lupus, send back the enclosed, exceedingly odd letter, which was published, although mutilated, in the *Siècle,* the *Temps* and the *Progrès de Lyon,* by the *jeunesse hongroise à Paris*[2] and sent to me by Schily.[3] This same *jeunesse* now proposes to let loose a pamphlet containing remarkable revelations about the Kossuth-Klapka-Türr triumvirate in Paris.

Apropos. You might communicate the FACTS contained in the letter to Eichhoff, 57 Ranelagh Street, Liverpool. He can get the thing into the *Zeitung für Norddeutschland* (Hanover).

A little while ago, so Schily writes, the Bern *Bund*[4] (mightn't you be able to look this up at the Club?) carried a statement by a Hungarian refugee in which Vogt is called 'the Palais Royal's[5] fattened sow', while Fazy, Kossuth, Klapka, and Türr figure as 'scoundrels and *gamblers*.'

I have got back 330 copies of *Vogt*[6] from that blackguard Koller. If only I knew of an opening! Might this not be the moment to dispose of them at a 100 p.c. loss? I. e., in Geneva and Bern. How opportune that would be just now!

I shall send you the April *and May* numbers of the *Press.*[7] In future you shall have them regularly. I shall procure the other stuff for you, i.e. the ESTIMATES.

As TO WINE, what the children most prefer, of course, is a motley collection. I believe that, according to Allen, claret and port are best.

I shall write to Dana again. I sorely miss their sending me the *Tribune.* This is a rotten trick of Greeley's and McElrath's. I discovered two things in the final March numbers of the *Tribune.* First, that McClellan had been *fully* informed a week beforehand about the withdrawal of the CONFEDERATES.[8] Secondly, that during the *Trent* affair,[9] Russell of *The Times* was taking advantage of what he had ferreted out in Washington in order to gamble on the New York Stock Exchange.[10]

In Prussia, things will get to the point of a *coup d'état,* not however to a *coup d'éclat!*[11]

The explanation for Bonaparte's present manoeuvres in Mexico[12] (the affair was originally of Pam's contriving) is that Juarez will acknowledge only the official debt of £46,000 to France. But Miramôn and his gang had issued, through the Swiss bankers Jecker et Co., government bonds to the tune of 52,000,000 dollars (on which ABOUT 4 mill, dollars had been paid). These government bonds—Jecker et Co. merely *hommes de paille*[13] —fell into the hands of Morny et Co. for next to nothing. They are demanding that Juarez acknowledge the same. *Hinc illae lacrimae.*[14]

Schurz is—a Brigadier-General with Fremont!!!

Your

K. M.

Borkheim paid me the balance last Friday.