---
id: MECW41-157
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Freiligrath, February 7, 1861"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 February 1861"
year: 1861
publication: "First published abridged in *Die Neue Zeit,* Jg. 30, Bd. 2, Ergänzungshefte, No. 12, Stuttgart, 1911-12 (in F. Mehring, 'Freiligrath und Marx in ihrem Brief- wechsel') and in full in: Marx and Engels,"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

IN LONDON

[London,] 7 February 1861

Dear Freiligrath,

I have so arranged matters with Engels that you can obtain the £30 *any day you like,* ditto the expenses at 24 hours' notice. The *tailleur*[1] thus becomes redundant, and I would ask you to let Engels know *when* he is to send the money.

I shall myself be obliged to go to Holland, since I won't otherwise be able to weather the current crisis. Would you be so good as to inquire from some business friend of yours what the position is in regard to *passports* in Holland—whether one has to have a passport? The *Tribune's* 'turpitude', coinciding as it did with other misfortunes, was all the more disastrous for me in that it prevented me from making futher arrangements about my wife's convalescence in accordance with doctor's orders. Although I don't belong to the category of 'German martyrs' and have always been inimical to that category, I nevertheless think I have had my fair share of refugee-trouble.

Besides Lassalle's,[2] I have received offers of journalistic employ- ment from 2 other quarters in Germany. However—and doubtless you share this view—I don't believe the tide has risen high enough for me to agree to anything of the kind just now.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

You can see what a HUMBUG OLD Ruge is by comparing Engels' *Reichsverfassungskampagne*[3] in the *Revue* with the version Arnold has palmed off on you.