---
id: MECW41-007
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Lassalle, January 30, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "30 January 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41, p. 11; First published: in F. Lassalle. *Nachgelassene Briefe und Schriften*, Stuttgart-Berlin 1922"
status: raw
---

*To Ferdinand Lassalle in Berlin*

Dear Lassalle,

I was very glad to get your letter. For I had believed — and had written to tell Engels so — that your reason for not writing was pique at my last letter.

I can only spare a minute or two since I have a leader to write today for the *New-York Tribune*. Quite briefly then:

1. I shall send you the pamphlet on the 'Communist Trial' straight away. So far as I am aware, you have already had one from me.

2. Vogt has been careful not to let his *Telleringian* concoction — i.e. the first version — reach us here. Neither Freiligrath (whom I have just seen) nor Kinkel, nor the *Hermann,* nor *any of the booksellers over here* have had it. The imperial rascal wishes, **of course**, to steal a march on me.

What I know, I have learned from the *National-Zeitung.* A pack of *Stieberian* lies. I have written and told my *lawyer in Berlin* to sue the N-Z. for *libel.* What do you think of this? Let me know *by return.*

From your letter I see that Vogt himself admits having been bought *indirectly* by Bonaparte, for I *know* about the *manoeuvres* of your revolutionary Hungarians. I denounced them in London in an *English* paper and had five **copies** sent to Mr Kossuth. He kept his trap shut. In New York, and elsewhere, *Hungarian refugees* have adopted resolutions *censuring him.*

Your reasoning *ad vocem* Vogt eludes me. I shall *write a pamphlet* as soon as I get hold of his rubbish. But I shall begin by saying in the foreword that I *don't give a damn* about the opinion of *your German public.*

*Liebknecht* is an upright man. The Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung* is — to *my* mind — just as good as the *N-Z.* and the *Volks-Zeitung.*

To judge by the excerpts I have seen in the *N-Zeitung,* Vogt is some kind of Chenu or de la Hodde.

3. About my work on political economy — the second instalment, when it appears, will contain only the conclusion of section 1, Book 1, and there are six books. Hence you cannot wait *until it is finished* . However, you would, in *your own interests,* be well-advised to await the next instalment which contains the *quintessence.* Appalling circumstances are to blame for the fact that it isn't yet in Berlin.

Salut.
K. M.