---
id: MECW41-188
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, October 30, 1861"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "30 October 1861"
year: 1861
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 30 October 1861

Dear Engels,

Circumstances have finally CLEARED to the extent that I have at least got firm ground under my feet again and am no longer in a state of complete suspense. As you know, shortly after my return from Manchester[1] and as soon as I thought the moment opportune, I again started writing for the *Tribune* at weekly intervals. Last week included, I had sent them 6 articles.[2] Then, in the *last* mail, the first 2 articles[3] actually came back in print, the first of them (over 3 columns on English opinions on the UNITED STATES) in a PROMINENT PLACE and particularly REFERRED TO on the front page of the paper. To this extent, then, the matter is in order and hence I am assured of *£2* per week.

*Secondly:* I had, as you know, already written to the Vienna *Presse* from Manchester, asking for 'information'.^1 About 3 weeks ago I got an answer which was *politically* entirely satisfactory to me. (In the meantime, the paper has modified its attitude to Schmerling.) At the same time, Friedländer (on behalf of Zang, the proprietor) asked for 2 sample articles. These[4] I sent off and yesterday morning I got an answer to the effect 1. that the articles had appeared with due prominence on the front page,[5] 2. that I was engaged on a regular basis from November, £1 per article, lOsh. per news-letter.

As regards the *Tribune,* I must first of all find some way of drawing bills, for it can hardly be arranged through Freiligrath in future.

For the rest, this twofold engagement holds out an assured prospect of putting an end to the harried existence led by my family over the past year, and also of finally completing my book.[6] Thanks to you, I was able to placate the more pressing of the blackguards at the beginning of September, but even so, the harassment was still quite intolerable, and in October it again reached a crescendo. I am writing today to my old lady[7] to find out whether anything can be squeezed out of her. I shall likewise see if I can raise something from a LOAN SOCIETY. My chief concern, of course, is to put my affairs into some sort of order, pending the availability of amounts WORTH DRAWING from New York and Vienna, and above all to have leisure in which to work during the interval that must necessarily elapse. In the MEAN TIME, we have pawned everything that was not actually nailed down and, what is even worse, my wife is seriously unwell. When it was simply a case of enduring the pressure of day-to-day adversities, she did this bravely, but she has been cast down by the complete absence of prospects. In the meantime, the favourable news from Vienna and New York has already evoked a favourable reaction.

Borkheim had strangely misled both himself and me over Kolatschek's *Stimmen der Zeit.* True, No. 39 carried a contribution running to a printer's sheet headlined 'K. Vogt und K. Marx', but it was written by the student *Abt,* the 'lowest of the low', whom you will remember from Geneva. Having taken due note of the actual content of my pamphlet[8] in the first 2 pages, he devotes the remaining 14 to railing in the most rabid and villainous fashion against me and, notably, Schily and Imandt, on account of the 'Bristlers'.[9] He concludes by saying that, if I don't recant, he will attack me 'at the only vulnerable spot he knows' and compromise me in a manner 'that I shall regret'. Needless to say, I didn't take the slightest notice of the scoundrel. But something very odd must have happened to put Mr Kolatschek at Abt's mercy, for, as Abt says, he had had the scrawl as far back as January and had refused to print it until September.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Don't forget to send me as detailed a report as possible on the *status quo* in Manchester.