---
id: MECW41-112
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, October 2, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "2 October 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

*Letter to Engels in Manchester*

[London,] 2 October 1860

Dear Engels,

One of my letters must have failed to reach you, for I wrote and told you that my FAMILY was spending a week at the SEASIDE.

As regards Dana's pages,' one of your large pages (e.g. in Artillery) was the equivalent of one of Dana's.

My impression of Siebel's letter was exactly the opposite of yours,1 namely his helplessness. Meissner, by reason of the Demokratische Studien, is actually in the enemy camp. Moreover, it would appear from his private conversation with Siebel that he expected a 'dignified' discussion and regards Vogt as a great man. O. Wigand is a personal enemy of mine and, years ago, on my offering to entrust him with the Eighteenth Brumaire (even for nothing), wrote me a churlish reply. Oelbermann in Bonn is a mere fantasy. I know the meridian of Bonn. All in all, the pamphlet is pretty well unpublishable in Germany (especially as Siebel has no connections with Leipzig publishers), judging by the style that has become established during the 10 years of reaction. And then to have the manuscript actually hawked round from one man to the next, thereby causing the whole thing to be blabbed out, without finding a taker—or only after protracted wanderings! I should, of course, prefer Cotta, Brockhaus or even Campe to Mr Petsch; but circumstances being what they are, I still regard him as a WINDFALL. Borkheim, who is a very good businessman, has great faith in Petsch. Finally, our last experiences in Germany were hardly encouraging.

Printing will go ahead more quickly this week at Hirschfeld's.

He still had all kinds of stuff that had to be finished.

I shall think about the title again. The fact that Dâ-Dâ will PUZZLE your philistine pleases me and fits in with my SYSTEM OF MOCKERY and CONTEMPT. Nevertheless (the title will, of course, be printed last), I shall again discuss it exhaustively with my critical conscience.[1] Contents are as follows: I. The Brimstone Gang. II. The Bristlers. III. Police Matters. 1. Confession. 2. The Revolutionary Congress in Murten. 3. Cherval. 4. The Communist Trial in Cologne. 5. Joint Workers' Festival in Lausanne. 6. Miscellany. IV. Techow's Letter. V. Imperial Regent and Count Palatine. VI. Vogt and the Neue Rheinische Zeitung. VII. The Augsburg Campaign. VIII. Vogt's Studien. IX. Agency. X. Patrons and Accomplices. XL Lawsuit against the National-Zeitung. XII. Appendices.

As you have no time just now for articles, write to me privately when anything of a military nature happens in Italy, informing me, quite briefly, of the chief points. I shall then myself DODGE what is necessary into shape.

J. Ph. Becker wants to go to Naples (accompanied by Schily).

He wants to raise a German volunteer corps there. (!!!)

I am completely broke. If you could send me a £ or two before the week is out, it would be very WELCOME.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

The effrontery of The Times (yesterday's) in suggesting that Garibaldi inspired 'CONFIDENCE' SO long 'AS HE COULD BE BELIEVED TO BE THE AGENT OF THE SECRET INTENTIONS OF NAPOLEON III',[2] is truly staggering. Edwin James, the clown, was in such a FUNK that he fled all the way back to London, arriving the day before yesterday. In the Plon-Plonist Opinion nationale Kossuth has addressed a letter to Garibaldi, which was written both in the spirit and at the behest of the Bonapartists.

Your RIFLE article[3] has gone the rounds of the London press and has even been discussed in the pro-government Observer. This was a SENSATION.