---
id: MECW41-064
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, May 7, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "7 May 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester, 7 May 1860]

Dear Moor,

Heckscher sent the story to the *Reform*[1] straight away, but with what success I don't yet know; as usual, having made a great song and dance about his influence, he now says he can't promise it will appear, etc.

Meanwhile Siebel has got it into the *Mittelrheinische Zeitung.* Any news from Berlin? Mr Szemere has put me to great expense over the Tokay. The wine's so sweet that no one can drink it, so I've sent back the whole lot, apart from a bottle or two, and shall, of course, have to bear all the expenses, customs duty, etc., etc. He writes most civilly, offering me other wines, but charges three times as much as Charles's[2] wine merchant in Pest. The fellow is trying to make huge profits out of his *entreprise toute patriotique*. Nous verrons![3]

Siebel is ill with some 'genius's ailment' on which, as usual, he prides himself. I shall go and see him this evening.

I haven't heard a word about my pamphlet[4] or seen anything in the papers. It's the *conspiration du silence* all over again.

Apropos. Reiff has come up here, or so he says, on the advice of Liebknecht, Lochner, etc.! He wants me to help him with money; is a street musician. I've told him that in the circumstances I would first have to write to you, which didn't seem to please him.— Said you were angry, etc., etc. *Que faire?*[5] What do you think of the chap? In any case, I can't do much for him.

My brother Emil is here and is negotiating with Ermen. I shall probably be remaining with Gottfried[6] as clerk with a percentage of the profits, in return for a guarantee that I shall become a partner in a few years' time. I'm trying to make the contract as onerous as possible for G. so that, when the time comes, he'll be only too glad to let me go. By the end of this week, or at any rate in the course of the next, everything will probably have been fixed up. For the next few weeks, by the way, I shall probably have to drudge fittingly, for Monsieur Gottfried intends to make great changes and do a lot of reorganising the moment he's in sole charge of the CONCERN.

Many regards to your wife and the young ladies.

Your

F. E.