---
id: MECW41-052
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 12, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "12 April 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 12 April 1860

Dear Engels,

BEST THANKS for the hundred pound note. It came as a glorious surprise THIS MORNING. The whole family was filled with glee.

You may or may not have seen that the *Kölnische Zeitung (Schlesinger,* London) has had the impudence to talk about the Brimstone Gang[1] and its Russian redolence. WELL! Through the good offices of my bankrupt friend Speck I am now hot on the trail of the whole Brimstone Gang here in London.

*D'abord,*[2] you'll have seen in the papers that Palmerston has amused himself by presenting Mr *Reuter* (the Jew from Trieste of telegraph fame) to the Queen.[3] And who do you think is factotum to this grammatically illiterate Jew Reuter? — *Siegmund Engländer,* who was expelled from Paris because, although a spy in the pay of France (600 frs. per month), he was discovered to be a 'secret' Russian spy. This same Reuter, together with Engländer, Hörfei and Schlesinger, was a partner in a Bonapartist lithographic news agency in Paris (an *honorary member* being one Esterhazy, a MAN ABOUT TOWN and the cousin of Esterh., the Austrian ambassador); they fell out, etc. Mr *Bernhard Wolff, chief proprietor of the Berlin 'National-Zeitung'* and owner of the Berlin telegraphic bureau, is hand-in-purse (partners) with *S. Engländer,* who is at present editing European world history in Reuter's name. N. B. Russia has now joined the 'Austro-German Telegraphic Union' and, *pour encourager les autres,* has got Pam to present her Reuter to the QUEEN. I am to get a detailed account of Schlesingers entire *curriculum vitae,* as well as that of Reuter's.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

My thanks to Siebel for the notes, which arrived today. Also for his *Religion und Liebe.*[4] My wife thinks highly of the latter.