---
id: MECW41-030
title: "Letter to J. M. Weber, February 21, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 February 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO J. M. WEBER

IN BERLIN

Manchester, 21 February 1860
6 Thorncliffe Grove, Oxford Road

Dear Sir,

The power of attorney was not sent off to you immediately after my first letter[1] because, further on in that same letter, I had requested you to telegraph me. Having waited a few days, it

a K. Blind, 'Gegen Karl Vogt', *Allgemeine Zeitung,* No. 44 (supplement), 13 February

[2][3]

seemed to me best to wait until the latest date (namely yesterday, 20 February) by which your written reply might be expected to reach London from Berlin.

Since this did not arrive and since, on the other hand, you did not reject by telegraph my request that you should act as my lawyer, I assume that you have accepted my brief. To avoid further loss of time, I am therefore sending you the following in this registered letter:

1. The power of attorney; 2. 7 enclosures, *together with translations* where the original is in English.

These enclosures comprise:

1. A. Vögele's affidavit;[4] 2. J. F. Wiehe's affidavit;[5] 3. My English anti-Blind circular.[6]

4. and 5. Two letters concerning this matter from the Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung* to me.[7]

6. Dr Schaible's statement in the *London 'Daily Telegraph'* of 15th February 1860, page 5, column 5, paragraph headed 'The Vogt Pamphlet'.

7. A letter from K. Blind to Liebknecht dated 8 September 1859.[8]

Tomorrow, by which time I shall, perhaps, have received a letter from you, I shall take the liberty of sending you some comments on these documents. However, you will see at first glance that the infamous conduct attributed to me in No. 41 of the *National- Zeitung,* where I am portrayed as the anonymous fabricator of papers allegedly circulating in other people's names, is irrefutably *shown* in law to be an infamous libel.

As regards the *affidavits* (statements made in court in lieu of an oath), all I would say is this: i You will note that in affidavit *enclosure II,* the words *UPON OATH-* have been deleted by the magistrate. For he explained to us that a statement made before him was the equivalent of a sworn statement, *that a false statement was a felony* and hence *punishable with TRANSPORTATION* but that, under English law, an oath could properly be administered only in the presence of the defendant.

The rest I shall leave for tomorrow, pending which I remain, Sir,

Your very obedient Servant,

Dr. K. Marx

I am not *certain* how long I shall be staying up here and hence would request that all letters be sent to my home address,

9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, London. On *the power of attorney* I have left a space for the names of the *National-Zeitung's* editors.