---
id: MECW41-042
title: "Letter to Lucien Jottrand, March 13, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 March 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published, in the language of the original (English) and in Russian, in *Voprosy istorii KPSS,* No. 4, Moscow, 1958 Reproduced from the original Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Wor"
status: raw
---

MARX TO LUCIEN JOTTRAND

IN BRUSSELS

Manchester, 13 March 1860
6 Thorncliffe Grove, Oxford Road

My dear Sir,

You will excuse me for having not before acknowledged the receipt of the letter you had the kindness to address me from Bruxelles. I thank you for that letter, although I shall abstain from using it in *any* way. Should I think it opportune laying before the public any official documents, relating to my past life, *the Bruxelles episode*—as far as it refers to my relations with the Belgian radicals—would be best characterised by two letters of yours (d.d. 25 févr. 1848)[1] and 19 mai 1848[2] which I have now found among my papers.

Since you belong to the American school of Republicans (whose opinions I do only accept in regard to some *political* questions), it may interest you to know that, for about 3 years, I am one of the principal writers in the *New-York Tribune,* the first Anglo-American paper. I have improved this connexion for giving M. Spilthoorn, on his passage through London, letters of recommendation for the *U. St.* Should you, on any occasion, want to publish anything— relating to the affairs of your country—in the *Tribune,* you may rely on my willingness of obliging you.

The shameless attacks (on behalf of which I have instituted *two actions for libel,* one at Berlin, one at London) recently made against me, proceed all from the Bonapartist camp. Monsieur Louis Bonaparte, through the instrumentality of M. Mocquard, his secrétaire intime, has publicly thanked the *New-York Times* for having done its best (and this its 'best' was of a very shabby description) to counteract my *New-York Tribune* strictures (since 1852) of the Lesser Empire.143

I have the honour

To be your humble servant

K. Marx

I am here at Manchester for a few days only. My address is: 9, Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill, London.

If you read German books, I shall give me the pleasure of sending you a copy of the first part of my "Kritik der Politischen Oeconomie" being now in progress of publication at Berlin.