---
id: MECW41-009
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 31, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "31 January 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 31 January 1860

Dear Engels,

Your article[1] received. Very good. Herewith a letter from Lassalle which arrived yesterday and to which I replied immediately, if briefly.[2] Only a pamphlet written by *us jointly* will get us out of this business. I have also written secretly to Fischel in Berlin, asking whether it is feasible to bring a libel suit against the *National-Zeitung.*[3] Vogt's piece[4] *(not* to be had *at any* booksellers in London; he has sent it neither to Freiligrath nor to Kinkel, nor to any of his other acquaintances over here. Obviously he wished to steal a march on us. I have thus had to order it) is, so far as we are concerned, clearly a de la Hodde-Chenusian concoction.[5] I have read the *second* article in

the *Nat.-Z.* from which I see *inter alia* that Lupus (described as Casemate Wolff, Parliamentary Wolff) is alleged to have sent a circular to a reactionary Hanoverian paper in 1850.[6] It gives a réchauffé of all the foul refugee gossip of 1850-52. The jubilation of the bourgeois press is, of course, unbounded, and the tone of Lassalle's letter—kindly show it to Lupus and then *file* it—clearly betrays the impression it has made on the public.

Yesterday I saw Freiligrath for a moment. I approached him very ceremoniously (i-f he has the slightest sense of honour he must make an anti-Vogt statement), and all our entreview[7]

amounted to was the following: '*I:* I've come to ask you to lend me the pamphlet on the Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung* lawsuit which I've been seeking in vain at all the booksellers and must certainly have been sent you by your friend Vogt. *F.* (very melodramatically): Vogt is not my friend. /: Lassalle has written to me that I must reply at once. You haven't got the pamphlet, then? *F.* No. /: Good evening.' (He held out his honest right hand and shook mine Westphalian-fashion.) *Voilà tout.*[8]

I was assured by Juch (owner and present editor of the *Hermann,* whose acquaintance I made in connection with the Stieber affair and Eichhoff's trial[9] in Berlin), that Kinkel hadn't yet had a copy from Vogt either. This same Juch had, however, been sent numerous Vogtian tirades against us which he did not print. This chap—who is, incidentally, quite honest in his own way—has got to be kept mellow for the time being. Since only the *Hermann* is now appearing in London, it would have been dreadful to have to confront Vogt's gang unarmed, here on our own ground.

*Apropos!* As a result of my first meeting with Juch,[10] on my advice, Eichhoff cited friend *Hirsch,* who is doing time in Hamburg for forgery, as a witness for the defence. Consequently, the trial, due to begin on 26 January (I read about this in the *Publicist),* was again adjourned after a heated argument. Stieber has now done with Hirsch.

*Salut.* Y o u l

K. M. Imandt has just told me that Heise is dead.