---
id: MECW41-056
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 17, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "17 April 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 17 April 1860

Dear Engels,

I trust that your indisposition isn't serious. Also that you are taking care of yourself and not over-working.

I have sent Lommel *the 150 francs* today.[1] (What you don't manage to scrape together in Manchester will be collected here.) For the following reasons:

1. If he is to retrieve the books[2] from the bookbinders', he has. got to pay 50 frs. That leaves him 100 frs. To haggle over that would be *exceedingly impolitic* and would not command any respect for our party.

2. The main thing is that the so-called advance be sent to the chap quickly and *unconditionally.* In that way, he'll be beholden to us. The other half he shall have BY AND BY and thus will remain

*ENGAGED* t O U S. 3. As soon as he has the money, he will leave for Savoy whence he will send back reports.

4. From Petsch's note enclosed herewith (I gave him the copy Siebel brought back with him) you will see that he believes that he can make a profit on what is, in fact, an interesting pamphlet.

5. L. is a decent chap. Otherwise he'd sell himself. From the papers Becker has sent me, I see that Lommel was a leading light

in the old Republican Party. Also a friend of Heinzen's. What a clamour there'll be from the latter over this defection!

I am in two minds about Siebel's work for the *Strassburger Zeitung?*[3]

Your

K. M.