---
id: MECW41-133
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 12, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "12 December 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 12 December [1860]

Dear Engels,

BEST THANKS FOR ARTICLE.[1] The item in the *Neue Preussische Zeitung* (if one disregards their own comments) is no more than a paragraph that appeared in the *Londoner Lithographierte Korrespondenz* (Schlesinger); with few exceptions, it was in *all* the German papers, for the most part under the heading 'London'.

The shorter version of the advertisement was confined to papers published in *England.* In the *German* papers, the table of contents was included.[2]

I am sending you herewith the advertisement in the *Buch- händlerbörsenblatt,'** composed by Petsch himself. The well-known 'politician' he speaks of at the end is *****magnus'**[3] * L. Bücher, who indicated as much when talking to Borkheim.*

The advertisements in the German papers probably appeared in the course of this week. A little after the book's arrival, it being undesirable (in view of the *Lawsuit')* to alert the Prussians.

Advertisements have been sent to the: *Allgemeine Zeitung; Br e si au er Zeitung; Bund* (Berne); *Deutsche Allgemeine'^*; *Frankfurter Journal; Hamburger Nachrichten; Freischütz; Reform; Karlsruher Zeitung; Kölnische Zeitung; Königsberger Härtung"; Mannheimer Journal; National-Zeitung; Neue Preussische Zeitung; Publicist;* Berlin *Volks-Zeitung; Ost-Deutsche Post; Presse; Rostocker Zeitung; Schwäbischer Merkur; Trier'sche Zeitung; Zeitung für Norddeutschland; Zürcher Neue Zeitung'**^1*****; *Neue Süddeutsche^* (Munich); *Morgenblatt; Wochenblatt des Nationalvereins"; Deutsches Museum; Illustrirte Zeitung; Ausland* (Augsburg); *Historische Deutsche Monatsschrift* (Brunswick).**

*New-Yorker Staatszeitung; New-Yorker Criminal-Zeitung; New-Yorker Abendzeitung. Times; Athenaeum; Critic; Saturday Review; Illustrated News; Manchester Guardian; Hermann.*

Copies sent *inter alia* to Cotta, the *Reform,* Duncker, 6 to Siebel; various to the English papers (Sat. *Review, Athenaeum, Critic, III. News);* Lommel, Brass, Fischel. Over 50 free copies despatched in all, but only a few of them to newspapers.

41 sold in London to date.

*Nota bene:* Lommel's *Hinter den Coulissen* is now in great demand in Germany. There have even been orders from Riga.

*Bücher* (who contributes articles to the supplement of the Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung,* e. g., the one on Persigny and Palmerston) has promised Borkheim he will write a review for the *A. Z.* I fear Biscamp may forestall him.

Liebknecht has placed advertisements and lengthy excerpts in 4 German-American and 4 English-American papers. He is now, I might add, literary correspondent to the last-named.

'Mr Vogt' writes signed articles for some of the more obscure American-German papers. Rails at 'Bonaparte'.[4] Declared that my pamphlet would *never* come out.

My wife is much better. But the children probably won't be allowed home for another fortnight. I myself have to spend almost all day with her and am feeling far from well. However, that will resolve itself as soon as she is in a more normal state of health.

A week ago, Allen cancelled the prescription for claret and prescribed port instead. I should be grateful, therefore, if you would send me a few bottles of the latter.

My library has arrived.[5] Still at the CUSTOM HOUSE, for the 'COMMISSIONERS' have not yet decided whether I am to have it DUTY FREE.

Now, just guess how I got to the bottom of *Ludwig Simon's* secret. (See appendix 16c.)[6] Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.