---
id: MECW41-204
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 3, 1862"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "3 March 1862"
year: 1862
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected "
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 3 March 1862

Dear Engels,

I am sending my wife to a LOAN OFFICE today to see what can be done there, for I've had a disgustingly rude letter from my LANDLORD, and, if the fellow puts a BROKER into the house, I shall be sued by all and sundry.

The wine hasn't arrived yet. I should be grateful if you could let me have *this week* (by Friday morning)[2] an article in *English* on the American war.)[3] You can write it *without the slightest misgiving.* The *Tribune* will print it as the LETTER OF A FOREIGN OFFICER. *Nota bene:* The *Tribune* hates McClellan, who is in league with the Democratic Party and, *throughout the period* in which he was COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF ALL THE ARMIES, prevented any action by *intervening directly* not only on the Potomac (where this may have been justified), but in *every* theatre of war, especially in the west. (He was also at the bottom of the highly infamous intrigue against Fremont.[4] Moreover, out of *esprit de corps* and a hatred of CIVILIANS, this same Mac has sheltered all the army's traitors, e.g., Colonel Maynard and General Stone. The latter's arrest took place a day or 2 after Clellan had been dismissed as COMMANDER IN CHIEF of all the armies. Similarly, the *New York Herald's* impudent 'REPRESENTATIVE'[5] in Washington was arrested as a SPY against McClellan's wishes, having on the previous day entertained McC.'s entire STAFF to a champagne breakfast.

You will recall my having told you from the start that nothing would come of the expectations regarding the China trade. This is confirmed by the latest BOARD OF TRADE report:[6]

*1860 1861*
[£] [£]
*China* 2,872,045 3,114,157
*Hong Kong* 2,445,991 1,733,967

Total 5,318,036 4,848,124

So, a decrease in total exports. More of them direct, fewer via Hong Kong. In the meantime, the Russians have seized another fine island off Korea.[7] Add to this their new 'OCCUPATIONS' in Java, and their supremacy of the NORTHERN PACIFIC is assured. The extent to which Pam's influence has *russified* the *entire* English press is borne out by its profound silence over Russia's PROGRESS in this area, ditto its passive attitude vis-à-vis Poland.

Apropos. Will you be so good as to let me know *at long last* what has become of the Lassalle[8] that was intended for my cousin Philips,[9] since, failing that knowledge, I am unable to write to the said cousin.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.