---
id: MECW41-301
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 22, 1863"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "22 December 1863"
year: 1863
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in English in *The Letters of Karl Marx,* selected and translated with explanatory not"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

Zalt-Bommel, 22 December 1863

Dear Engels,

You will see from the address that I am back in Holland, where I arrived safely yesterday. In Trier, where the papers and effects left by my mother had been placed under seal, the unsealing could not take place because the Dutch powers of attorney, which must pass through the hands of an endless succession of authorities, had not yet arrived. I left a power of attorney for my brother-in-law Conradi for submission to the Department of Trier and proceeded to headquarters here, firstly because my uncle[1] holds by far the largest part of the assets, secondly because he is the executor of the will. However, in any case it will be another 5-6 weeks before I receive payment of the money. Since my wife has to pay a butcher's BILL for £10 on 10 January 1864 (i.e. a *bill of exchange),* I should be very glad if you could attend to it.

The carbuncle has gone the way of all flesh, but now for good measure my back is wickedly plagued with furuncles and last night, for example, thanks to these pestilential objects, I couldn't get a wink of sleep which would, after all, only have been fair after travelling here from Frankfurt a.M. The husband[2] of a cousin[3] of mine is the town's only doctor and medical officer of health, so I am not in want of Aesculapian assistance.

Throughout the Rhine Province, from Trier to Frankfurt a.M. and thence via Giessen and Cologne right up to the Dutch frontier, I heard nothing but abuse of Prussia. Little, very little, Schleswig-Holsteinianism. For the most part, it was regarded as 'Prussian artfulness'.

I spent only one day in Frankfurt (where I had to visit two old aunts)[4] and hence wasn't able to see any publishers. However, I spoke to an acquaintance who will write to me *here* (after he has consulted with a publisher on my behalf).[5]

When writing your pamphlet[6] it might be better if you were now to include some actual events as well, not forgetting the systematic blunders perpetrated by the Prussian government, the men of Progress[7] and the regular—since 1815 inveterate— Schleswig-Holstein HUMBUGGERS.[8]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

You might drop me a line or two. Address Charles Marx, CARE OF Mr Lion Philips, Zalt-Bommel, Holland.

**Tu n'es pas un Yankee, s'écria le fanatique... Depuis que tu es ici, je t'observe. Dans la figure du Saxon il y a du taureau et du loup; dans la tienne il y a du singe et du chien. Tu as peur de la liberté, tu parles de ce que tu ne sais pas, et tu fais des phrases. Tu es un Français!**[9] (195-196, *Paris en Amérique* by *Edouard Laboulaye.) (Paris* 1863.)