---
id: MECW41-086
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, after June 28, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "28 June 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed ac"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester, after 28 June 1860]

Dear Moor,

Encl. an article on the RIFLE parade;[1] the subject occurred to me just when I was about to despair. Go over it thoroughly; I haven't the time to do so myself.

Those Prussians really do have a 'nice style' just now. Since the action against the *National-Zeitung* could only serve to introduce a strident note of discord into the general constitutional harmony, the case must be stopped at all costs. The judges, 'and there still are such in Berlin',[2] are being got at and I'm quite positive that Mr Weber has been got at, too. It's quite plain to me from the whole tone of his letters. All the more need, then, to press on with the pamphlet[3] so that the noble Prussians can be shown that they are not, after all, able to suppress such things. Those swine. Might it be, perhaps, that they quietly affected such a liberal attitude towards me,[4] in order to behave all the more abominably to yourself?

If possible, I shall do Bohemia this evening.[5] Incidentally, you should devise the pamphlet—difficult though this may be—in such a way as to make it absolutely impossible for the Prussians to ban it. And above all be quick, for it is probable that between now and 1861 the daydream of peace will gain ascendency and hence interest in high treason wane. Do try and be a bit superficial for once, so that you get it done in time.

Your

F. E.

Lommel's parcel there yet?

Lupus leaves next week for a month's holiday in Ireland, etc., etc.