---
id: MECW41-225
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 5, 1862"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "5 July 1862"
year: 1862
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 5 July [1862]

Dear Engels,

Best thanks for the £10 of which *pars*[1] I arrived today. I hear that Mr Gumpert was down here; didn't come to see me.

WELL, I SHALL TRY TO DO WITHOUT HIM.

Herewith 1 *Press*[2] and two very clever 'talks' by Lassalle.[3]

The enclosed letter from Lassalle was brought me by the Austrian 'Captain (retd.)' Schweigen, a worthy, stupid fellow. The joke is that Rüstow—with the added support of 2 Rüstow brothers—has proposed or is proposing so to use the National Association,[4] the Gymnastic Association, etc., as to have, at the crucial moment—in the smaller German states, at least—a ready-made *militia commanded by Mr Rüstow* to pit against the army. It's a damn silly plan. And, on top of that, the money for it is to come from London! I don't believe Lassalle shares these DELUSIONS. All he wants is to make himself seem important in the eyes of Schweigert, etc.

I hope that you, at any rate, will come to London IN THE COURSE OF THE SEASON. Little Jenny is no longer unwell, but has grown more delicate than her constitution warrants. Whatever happens, by the by, we must manage to arrange sea-bathing for her.

Is Lupus in Germany by now?[5]

What is the position with regard to the 'ASSOCIATES' of the BRITISH ASSOCIATION?[6] Are the old cards still valid? Lupus has got mine.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.