---
id: MECW41-131
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 5, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "5 December 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed a"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 5 December [1860]

Dear Engels,

Best thanks for the article.[2]

My wife is getting on very well, and I believe the wine is doing her more good than any medicine. But at night, when she is restless, can't sleep, and is even a little delirious, it's still very disturbing.

How about letting me have another article by Saturday,[3] *about my lawsuit*—perhaps, dated from *Berlin?* When I find writing LEADERS awkward, I date them from Berlin, Paris, etc. Such articles are easier to get through.

Might not something be said about the Chinese war? Or Bonaparte's military preparations, etc.?[4]

At the moment, I have absolutely no 'ideas' about anything. What I have got is an "orrible'[5] headache.

The children—poor little devils—are still living in exile.[6] To cheer them up, I have sent them a bottle or two of wine. The day before yesterday, the little one[7] saw me walking past Liebknecht's house and shouted from the window: 'HALLOO, OLD BOY!'

Apropos! As soon as Freiligrath heard of my wife's illness (didn't, of course, know what it was), he, of course, wrote me a letter full of 'feeling'. But when I sent him *Herr Vogt*[8] —with, of course (you can see just how many ideas I have from the way 'of course' has cropped up 3 times in 3 lines), a friendly inscription, and he had occasion to write to me about SOMETHING ELSE, he forgot to say a word about the book, or TO ACKNOWLEDGE its receipt. To suggest that he had forgotten to do so, he wrote at the bottom of his letter, 'In great haste'. I believe there are certain parts that worry him stiff. Firstly, his 'indiscretion' *re* Vogt. But *Fazy,* in particular. He was intending to move to Geneva in the spring. One wonders whether the disclosure of the Fazy scandal might not prove a hindrance.

Blind, who had already ordered a copy from Petsch last Thursday,[9] didn't get one until yesterday [Tuesday]. The thing wasn't distributed in London until then so as to prevent MR ALBERTS, OF THE PRUSSIAN EMBASSY, warning Berlin before my package of books arrived there. In London, of course, there have been a lot of jibes at my 'undignified' mode of attack. Twelve COPIES were ordered yesterday by that louse Trübner.

*Salut.* Your

K. M.