---
id: MECW41-198
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 19, 1861"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "19 December 1861"
year: 1861
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41, p. 334; First published: abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Berlin, 1930."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 19 December 1861**

Dear Engels,

You know how the Dronke business came about. I wrote to him, not because of the bill, but to dun him. In the circumstances, I was, of course, compelled to inform him of the critical situation I was in, a situation which he, like anyone else, must, and did, find quite natural in view of the American affair. As a result of this communication, he came to see me and, thus, the arrangement was made which, to begin with, I would never even have thought of, had you not *expressly* stated in your letter that you would accept the bills if I was able to get them discounted through Freiligrath or 'some other person'. I say this much in order to absolve myself of any semblance of indiscretion.

There is *nothing* doing with F., as I already knew beforehand. He only had the tailor and by the time of the *Tribune* affair he'd already lost him, because two of his clerks had obtained articles of clothing to the value of £70 on his recommendation and decamped without paying. Moreover, **my relations to** F. were so **changed** that, when he arranged to have even my bills on the *Tribune* discounted again by Bischoffsheim, he did so only with reluctance. But, even if he had *wanted* to, he couldn't particularly since the latent bankruptcy of his bank *court par les rues de Londres*.

This letter will go off at the same time as one to *Dronke,* informing him that I embarked on the **transactions** with him as a result of a misunderstanding and asking him therefore to regard them as *non avenues.* I also told him that, if he could discount the bills on *me* personally **without any intervention of other persons**, this would be agreeable to me. I had to tell him that, because I can see no way out, and indeed my situation is one of the utmost peril.

His address, letters to be marked *private, is* 49 Oldhall Street, Liverpool. Judging by what Dronke says (though I believe he's in Newcastle and not in Liverpool at all), he would simply try to arrange the matter with his own **banker**.

Unfortunately, I couldn't help informing my wife of the contents of your letter, insofar as it referred to the bill transaction. And news of this kind always brings on a kind of paroxysm.

As to *war with America,* Pain may *possibly* succeed in bringing it about, but not without difficulty. He has got to have a **pretext** and it *doesn't* seem to me *as though Lincoln will give him one.* Some of the Cabinet, Milner Gibson, Gladstone, *plus ou moins* Lewis, can't be so easily **be fooled** as John Russell.

Taken by and large, the Americans have not been at fault, either *materially* or. *formally,* under *English* maritime law, which is in force there. **As to the question of material right**, the English **Crown lawyers** have themselves given a decision along these lines. They have therefore adduced, since Pam needed a **pretext**, an **error** *in forma,* a **technicality, a legal quibble**. But this, too, is erroneous. Under English maritime law one must distinguish between two cases. Whether **a neutral ship carries belligerent goods and persons** or **contraband of war**, either in the form of objects or persons. In the latter case, the ship with **cargo** and persons is **to be seized and brought into a port for adjudication**. In the first instance — if it is established *beyond doubt* that the **goods** (properly speaking an impossibility in the case of persons) have not *passed* into the possession of a neutral, the **belligerent goods** or persons may be seized **on the high seas**, while. the ship, etc., gets off scot-free. This sort of jurisprudence has — if we disregard the **authorities** — been constantly asserted by England, as I have discovered for myself by consulting Cobbett's Register' on all the squabbling that has gone on with neutrals since 1793.

Conversely, since the English **Crown lawyers** confined the problem to an **error** *in forma* and thus conceded the Yankees the *right* to seize all English ships with **belligerents** aboard and bring them into port **for adjudication**, the Yankees may very well — and in my view will — declare that they are satisfied with this concession, that in future they will commit no *formal* infringements in case of seizure, etc., and deliver up Mason and Slidell **for the nonce**.

If Pam is absolutely set on war, he can, of course, bring it about. In my view, *that is not his intention.* If the Americans act in the way I imagine they will, Pam will have provided stupid John Bull with fresh proof that he is '**the Truly English Minister'.** The chap will then be free to do whatever he likes. He will seize this opportunity,

1. to force the Yankees to recognise the Declaration of Paris on the rights of the neutrals;

2. to use this as a pretext for *something he has hitherto not dared to do,* namely request and prevail upon the English Parliament to sanction the abandonment of the **Old English Maritime Law**, the said abandonment having been subscribed to by Clarendon — on his (Pam's) instructions — unbeknown to the Crown and without the prior knowledge of Parliament.

Pam is an old man, and, since the time of Catherine II, the Russians have been trying to enforce the declaration published in Paris. There are still two things they lack: *the sanction of the English Parliament* and *the accession of the* **United States***.* On this occasion, both would be achieved. It seems to me that these warlike alarums are simply theatrical props with which to make stupid John Bull believe that the definitive abandonment of his own **Maritime Laws** in favour of Russia is a victory over the Yankees won thanks to the **pluck** of the '**Truly English Minister'.**

Additional reasons for these warlike alarums seem to be: Diversion of attention from Poland (for at public meetings even fellows such as Conningham from Brighton are demanding the **Stoppage of further payment** of the **Dutch-Russian Loan**) and diversion of attention from Denmark where Russia is engaged at this moment in ousting Glücksburg, the **Heir presumptive** appointed by herself.

It is, **of course**, possible that the Yankees won't give way, and, in that case, Pam will be forced into war by his preparations and rodomontade to date. However, I would rate the odds at 100 to 1 against.

*Salut.*

Your
K. M.