---
id: MECW41-125
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 23, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 November 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 23 November 1860

Dear Frederick,

Best thanks for the £10 and the 'NAVY'[2] (splendid article). Now, as regards my wife's illness, it is in one respect better and in another worse than I was aware. For, until the character of the disease was definitely determined, Allen concealed its true nature from me. Yesterday this was no longer possible. What my wife has got is—SMALL POX, and very badly, too, although she has been twice vaccinated against it. (Tell *no one* about it except Lupus.) And that's why Allen promptly removed the children from the house. It's a ghastly disease. Should Lenchen catch it, I shall at once send her to hospital. So far, I have done the nursing (the bulk of it) myself. But, as I find it too exhausting, I hired a nurse as soon as the £10 arrived today. For many weeks my wife had been in an exceptionally nervous state owing to our many TROUBLES, and was thus more liable TO CATCH the contagion in an omnibus, shop, or the like.

Writing articles is almost OUT OF THE QUESTION for me. The only occupation that helps me maintain the necessary QUIETNESS OF MIND is mathematics. During the past weeks I have written *de omnibus rebus*[3] for the *Tribune,* mainly on the WARSAW CONGRESS, the STATE OF POLAND, ITALY, FRANCE and the money market.[4] Nothing about China yet.

Have you had the Kolatschek?[5]

The doctor has allowed my wife claret, taken in small doses, as she is exceptionally weak. Last night was dreadful—indeed, at the moment, I myself am SICK as well.

The devil alone knows what misfortunes we suffer. I have boarded the poor children out witn the Liebknechts, who live quite close by and to whom I sent the VICTUALLERS daily. They objected to going to BOARDING SCHOOL because of the RELIGIOUS RINKS.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.