---
id: MECW41-059
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 24, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 April 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 24 April 1860

DEAR Frederick,

Herewith a letter from Weber. From that letter I learn for the first time (what the jackass might have been kind enough to tell me earlier on) that he did not *originally* file a civil but a *criminal* action for *injuria* against Zabel, which means that, under Prussian law, the application has to be countersigned by the Royal Procurator's Office. Since this has been refused, he has appealed. It is, of course, 'an issue of *public* importance'[1] to the Prussian government that we should be traduced to the utmost.

From his letter you will see that he also instituted the civil action on the 18th.

Will you let Dr Heckscher know about this business and give him some notes (a few lines) on the subject for the Hamburg *Reform}''* He has himself repeatedly offered to do me a service of this kind, and the matter has got to be brought out into the open (if only to instil a little caution into the Prussian government). I am also writing to Siebel to this effect. Indeed, the public must not be allowed to suppose that the matter has lapsed.

The stuff from Lommel (I have got six or seven more documents from him)[2] contains ample CIRCUMSTANTIAL EDIVENCE of Vogt's bribery. Vogt no longer feels *safe* in Geneva and has therefore applied for Schwyz citizenship. I hope, by the by, that one of these days you will write me a proper letter telling me just how *your* affairs are going. It's not very friendly of you to treat me with the reserve that might be appropriate in the case of others.

How goes it with your health? I've been most anxious about it.

Your

K. M.

The Perrier business had been prearranged with Bonaparte, but never attained the dimensions originally envisaged.[3] J. Perrier was in Paris *with* Fazy, and was seen there by Becker's son.[4]

No answer as yet from Fischel, to whom I wrote[5] on the subject of your pamphlet[6] (Schily has also badgered him about it).

While, in the West German *Strassburger Zeitung,*^b the literary Zouaves keep up the skirmish, so too do the literary Cossacks in the German *Baltische Monatsschrift* (Riga); we 'Teutons' are thus under attack on both flanks.^1