---
id: MECW41-010
title: "Letter to Bertalan Szemere, January 31, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "31 January 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in the language of the original (English), in *Revue d'histoire comparée,* t. IV, No. 1-2, Budapest, 1946 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume"
status: raw
---

MARX TO BERTALAN SZEMERE

IN PARIS

London, 31 January 1860
9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

My dear Sir,

I conclude from your silence, that you have taken offence at my last letter,[1] but I dare say, without any sufficient reason. You will not deny that by your own letter, the last but one, *you* did release me from the promise I had made to you.[2] On the other hand, you may any day write to Berlin, and ascertain from Mr Duncker, the publisher, that he has called upon me not any longer to delay the sending of the manuscript due to him.^8 Lastly, my proposal of Mr Kavannagh was, of course, meant to serve *you,* not *me,* and I proposed it only as a *pis-aller.'**[3] *******

Meanwhile, I took care to have a notice of your pamphlet (or rather of its impending appearance) inserted in the *Weser-Zeitung,* by a friend of mine. So soon as your pamphlet has come to my hands, I shall feel happy to give a large article on the same in the *New-York Tribune.* Kossuth has tried, by another letter to McAdam, at Glasgow, to attract public attention in England. This time his effort has proved a complete failure.

There is one affair, in which I require information on your part, and think myself justified to ask it from you.

Prof. Vogt (the tool of James Fazy at Genf,[4] who is intimately connected, as Vogt is, with Klapka and Kossuth) has published a pamphlet on his lawsuit with the A. *A. Zeitung'**[5] *****. This pamphlet contains the most absurd calumnies against myself, so that I cannot but *reply* to the scandalous libel, though I regret the time to be applied to so mean a subject. Well. He now contends that he received the money for his propaganda from revolutionary Hungarians, and, half and half, insinuates, that the money came *directly* from Hungary. How incredible, since Kossuth-himself could get none from that source. Can you inform me somewhat exactly about Klapka's circumstances at the time before the**

outbreak of the Italian war?)[6] Since I shall be forced, in the pamphlet I intend writing, to speak of Kossuth et Co., somewhat largely, you will oblige me by adding what new points you have found out regarding his recent transactions. Has he, out of the 3 millions, spent any part for paying or for arming a Hungarian corps? (I mean apart from the money given to military and civil dignitaries.[7]

The time becomes very critical, and, I hope, no misunderstand- ing shall prevent our common action.

Yours truly

A. W.'