---
id: MECW41-040
title: "Letter to Collet Dobson Collet, March 7, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 March 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934. Reproduced from the copy in Marx's notebook Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collecte"
status: raw
---

MARX TO COLLET DOBSON COLLET[1]

IN LONDON

Manchester, 7 March 1860
6 Thorncliffe Grove, Oxford Road

My dear Sir,

Having been absent from here for a few days, I was prevented answering your letter immediately.

As to the Printers' Bill,[2] which I had taken the liberty to ask you for in a letter addressed to you on the 6th of February[3] (if I am not mistaken), you have forgotten transmitting it to me. Pray, send it to Mrs Marx.

As to Schaible's declaration (*extorted* by my proceedings against Blind)[4], it will be sufficient to remark:

1st) Whether Blind be the **literary** author of the fly-sheet, is a question I have not to deal with. He *is* the author in the *legal* sense of the word.

Schaible's declaration (which 'circumstances', he says in the *Telegraph,*;[5] prevented him for three months from making, but which I extorted *in no time* by sending to *Louis Blanc* a copy of the two *Affidavits* at the Bowstreet Police-Court) proves much *against* Vogt. It proves nothing *for* Blind. It does not exculpate him in any respect. He has *written* (if not *drawn up*) the manuscript; he has *printed* it in Hollinger's office; he *paid* Hollinger's Printer's Bill; he made *two false* declarations in the Augsburg Gazette[6] he and Hollinger entered into *conspiracy* against me in order to induce (and with what success you know) the compositor Wiehe to give them *false* evidence. This is not all. Blind, as you know from the letter he addressed in September to Liebknecht, had the cool impudence of stating that he had *nothing at all* to do with the whole affair. Lastly, all the successive steps now taken by him and Schaible were *forced* upon him by the menace suspended over his head for a criminal action for 'conspiracy'.

2) Dr Schaible may, for aught I know, have allowed himself to be made Blind's scape-goat. He, as I know, belongs so to say to the household furniture of Blind's.

3) The principal political end I aimed at, has been obtained by Schaible's declaration. It makes void and annuls the proceedings at Augsburg,[7] —mere mock proceedings; there being present no witnesses, no accuser, no (real) accused, and, in point of fact, *no tribunal,* since Vogt, in his wisdom, had appealed *not* to *that* description of Bavarian tribunal which, according to the Bavarian law, *had* to decide on the case. In respect to this same Vogt, it will suffice to say that at *Geneva,* his own place of residence, a Swiss paper (*Die Neue Schweizer Zeitung, The New Swiss Gazette,* in its number of *November 12, 1859*) has declared to have indignantly repulsed Vogt's attempt at bribing it with *French* money.[8] That same paper, in a leading article, called upon Vogt to take judicial proceedings against itself, same way as I, in a declaration signed with my name, and published in the *Augsburg Gazette* and the *Hamburg 'Reform',* had called upon him to sue the *Volk* at London.[9] Vogt, although a Genevese *Ständerath*[10] and, therefore, a public servant, rested mute to these appeals, while enlisting the favour of the stupid German Liberals by the Augsburg comedy, or rather *farce.*

You will be so kind to *consider this letter as confidential,* since the lawyers who carry on my actions for libel at Berlin and London, think it fit that, except on the most urgent emergency, I should not break my silence until *after* the judicial proceedings have been closed.

Yours faithfully

K. Marx