---
id: MECW41-298
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, December 3, 1863"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 December 1863"
year: 1863
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 3 December 1863

Dear Moor,

Herewith U/O 16055 & 56, two fivers, in all £10, dated Manchester, 13 Jan. '63, for your trip to Trier. I trust our compatriots' Schleswig-Holstein enthusiasm won't spoil your visit too much. I've swotted up the whole question[1] and have come to the conclusion

1. that the Schi.-Holst, theory is a lot of rubbish; 2. that in Holstein the Augustenburg fellow would certainly seem to be in the right;[2]

3. that in Schleswig it's difficult to say who is entitled to succeed—but the male line, if at all, only *as Denmark's vassal;*

4. that the London Protocol is certainly valid in Denmark, but is certainly not so in Schleswig and Holstein because the Estates were not consulted;

5. that the German right to Schleswig is confined to the *south,* which is German by nationality and free choice, so that Schleswig would have to be partitioned;

6. that at present Germany's only chance of liberating the Duchies lies in *our starting a war against Russia for the benefit of Poland.* Then Louis Napoleon would be our obedient servant, Sweden would instantly throw herself into our arms, and England, *hoc est*[3] Pam, would be hamstrung; then we could take anything we liked from Denmark with impunity.

THEM IS MY SENTIMENTS. I'd like to enlarge upon them in a pamphlet, if you could find a publisher for it in Germany.

Needless to say, I'd put my name to it. *Qu'en dis-tu?*[4]

Lupus is better, but still a bit unsteady on his pins. Many regards to the FAMILY. I was damned glad to see your scratchy scrawl again.

Your

F. E.