---
id: MECW41-170
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Lassalle, May 8, 1861"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 May 1861"
year: 1861
publication: "First published in: *F. Lassalle. Nachgelassene Briefe und Schriften,* Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922 Printed according to the original Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels "
status: raw
---

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE[1]

IN BERLIN

London, 8 May 1861
9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Lazarus,

*Post tot discrimina rerum.*[2] If anyone is responsible for my silence—during my travels, that is, for here in London I had to spend my first week playing Amphitryon[3] to my cousin from Rotterdam[4] —it is the countess.[5] She had promised that I would find her portrait and a letter from her at Zalt-Bommel. Since neither of these materialised, and since I am a strict observer of the *jus vindictae*[6] I didn't write either. In addition, my time at Bommel was completely taken up. On the one hand, I had business with my uncle,[7] and on the other, I had to pay court to my cousin.[8] So, YOU SEE, SIR, WRITING WAS OUT OF THE QUESTION. My stay in Trier was useful in as much as my mother destroyed some old I.O.U.s. Incidentally the old woman also intrigued me by her exceedingly subtle esprit and unshakable equanimity.

First, then, to the financial side. Herewith an interim payment of £20. You still have £10 to come. The concatenation of circumstances was as follows: My uncle gave me £150 in cash to pay bills due at the beginning of May. He promised to send a further bill to London a few weeks later. In the meantime, therefore, I borrowed the enclosed £20 from my cousin, ditto some money for the household, and a third amount for the repayment of various small loans in Germany. If, however, you must have the outstanding £10 straight away, let me know at once.

I couldn't go to Manchester as I had originally planned[9] because my cousin from Rotterdam decided to travel to London hard on my heels. The pretext was his interest in discussing politics with me. IN FACE, however, I believe he wanted to make the acquaintance of his various female cousins. I wrote to Engels the day before yesterday about the plans for the newspaper[10] and shall doubtless have an answer from him in a day or so. Conditions in America will probably be such that, even if nothing comes of the newspaper enterprise, I may move to Berlin for a semester or thereabouts, ALWAYS SUPPOSED THAT I GET MY RENATURALISATION. London, I CANT DENY IT, possesses an extraordinary fascination for me, although, to a certain extent, I live a hermit's life in this gigantic place.

Apropos. Blanqui is still in Mazas prison[11] (Paris) where he is being *physically* maltreated by the gendarmes, etc., on *the instructions of the examining magistrate.* Taking advantage of the general amnesty, he had travelled from here to Paris—with no plans for conspiracy whatever—as an agent for a businessman. In England, as elsewhere in Europe, the scoundrelly press TRIES TO BURKE THE WHOLE AFFAIR. I have made an appointment for next Saturday with Simon Bernard, who knows more about the matter,[12] and we shall then discuss the subject thoroughly. We intend, possibly in concert with Ernest Jones, to hold a PUBLIC MEETING about this outrage. As soon as I have spoken to Bernard and am better informed I shall send a report to the countess. But I would ask you to see to it at once through one channel or another that an item about this *guet-apens*[13] appears in the Breslau papers. The German papers reprint one another's stuff, as you know.

To turn from tragedy to tragi-comedy, did you see in the newspapers that workers in Geneva boxed Fazy's ears in broad daylight?

Kossuth's behaviour here during the lawsuit[14] was lamentable. Having at first taken the floor with such swagger in his AFFIDAVITS, etc., he bowed and scraped during the hearing itself, assumed as insignificant and subdued an air as possible, disavowed all *revolutionary* designs or intentions on his own part and thus stupidly deprived himself of the sympathies of a public predis- posed in favour of such melodramatic characters.

I don't know whether you have followed the parliamentary debates on the MacDonald CASE.[15] Palmerston's provocative behaviour towards Prussia[16] has, in fact, no other aim than to explode the idea (Schleinitz's) of an Anglo-Prussian alliance. I need hardly tell you to what purpose, for you know the story.

Toby Meyen, in a Berlin letter to the Hamburg *Freischütz,* has produced very curious explanations of my stay in Berlin.[17] *D'abord,*[18] Countess Hatzfeldt is said to have offered me 20,000 talers to found a newspaper. *Secundo,* I had imagined that *Herr Vogt* had won me support among the middle classes, on which score, however, I suffered a bitter disappointment. And, *ultimo,* I gave the thing up in despair, since 'not one man of letters' wished to have 'anything to do' with me. Good shot, Toby!

Rodbertus's pamphlet[19] is highly commendable as regards its tendency. Otherwise, what is good in it isn't new and what is new in it isn't good. Roscher[20] on the other hand is the true representative of professorial erudition. *Fausse science,*[21] as Fourier would say.

Don't forget to knock at Brockhaus's door;[22] 10-20 sheets, for I can never estimate the length in advance.

And now, *mon cher,* I must conclude by most cordially thanking you for the kind and amiable way in which you took me in and entertained me and, more especially, put up with my incivilities. As you know, I was beset by worries and am also troubled with my liver. But the chief thing is that we laughed together a great deal. *Simia non ridet*[23] and thus we have shown ourselves to be truly consummate Buddhas.

I enclose two small photographs, one for the countess, to whom I would ask you to convey my best respects, and one for yourself.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.