---
id: MECW41-061
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Lassalle, April 24, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 April 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in: *F. Lassalle. Nachgelassene Briefe und Schriften,* Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin 1922 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 40"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN BERLIN

London, 24 April 1860
9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear Lassalle,

Many thanks for Humboldt[1] and Fichte.[2] I hadn't yet read the latter, and it was CLEVER of you to throw it into the fray. When your letter arrived, I got Engels to send me both your letter and the one from Counsellor Weber in Berlin. From this last I see that the matter of not mentioning his name applied *solely* to my public announcements in the newspapers^3; hence I was, in this instance, labouring under a misapprehension.

Today I have heard from Weber. From his letter it would appear that he *began* by filing a criminal action. He then received the following communication dated 18th inst.

'The original documents are returned to Dr Carl Marx, c/o Counsellor Weber, together with the notification that *no issue of public importance* is raised by this matter which could make it desirable for me to take any action (Art. XVI of the Prolegomena to the Penal Code of April 14, 1851). Berlin, April 18, etc. Lippe.'

Weber has appealed to the Chief Public Prosecutor^1 against this ruling. At the same time, in order to prevent its becoming statute-barred and to keep open another course of action, he has filed the action for *injuria* with the civil judge.

With my pamphlet[3] in view, I am, of course, having investigations made in Paris and Switzerland, and have even sent an emissary^c to Geneva. I now have *proof* that Vogt is a French agent. At the moment, he no longer feels safe in Geneva and is therefore sounding out the possibility of becoming a citizen of another canton.

Apropos. An acquaintance of mine—a Berliner—staunchly maintains that a certain Mayer or Meier,[4] of the firm Abraham M. and Co. (or Sons), who lives in Viktoriastrasse, Berlin, is the correspondent of the *Daily Telegraph.* Could you not get your lady friends to investigate?

Shall reply to your letter anon. No doubt you'll have left Berlin by the time this note reaches you.

Your

K. M.