---
id: MECW41-072
title: "Letter to Eduard Fischel, June 1, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "1 June 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 30, Moscow, 1963 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO EDUARD FISCHEL[1]

IN BERLIN

[London,] 1 June 1860

Sir,

For the past three weeks I have been suffering from a liver complaint, which has made it quite impossible for me to write or work and from which I have not yet wholly recovered. As a result, I have got into such arrears with my work that the next few weeks are spoken for, and hence I shall *under no circumstances* be able to start contributing immediately to the new newspaper. Could you send me one or two numbers of the same for my perusal? And likewise give me some advice about the PRINCIPAL MANAGERS of the new undertaking? Black, red and gold is a *couleur* which can now be used to some effect vis-à-vis other countries.[2]

I recommend to you Mr Georg Lommel, 85 rue du Nord, Café Court, Genève, for the post of Geneva correspondent of the paper.

Geneva is now a major seat of Bonapartist intrigue, and Lommel is well informed. I am convinced that he would agree to act as your correspondent on very reasonable terms.

*Ad vocem*[3] *Abel:* Many thanks for this discovery. Who is Abel? You would greatly oblige me by sending a few more details; indeed I should like to have this information as soon as possible.

I have doubtless already told you that the Chief Public Prosecutor has upheld the Public Prosecutor's^1 dismissal of my libel action on the grounds that no 'public interest' would be served thereby. So the civil action will now be going ahead.

You will have seen in the papers that Reuter, the Jewish confidence trickster who owns the London telegraphic bureau, was presented to the Queen.^1 Quite simply the facts are as follows: Reuter's factotum—he himself being barely able to write grammatically—is the Viennese refugee *Sigmund Engländer.* This Engländer was previously in Paris, where he contributed to a lithographic news bulletin run under the auspices of the then minister of police; at the same time, he was a French *mouchard.* When the Oriental war broke out, he was expelled from Paris because it had been discovered that he was a *Russian* spy. He then came to London where he eventually entered the service of Reuter, with whom he had already had connections earlier on. Now, since the entire European press is controlled by Reuter *via* his telegraphic bureau, and the telegraphic bureau by the Russian embassy *via* Engländer, you will understand why Pam presented Reuter to the Queen. So far as I know, the presentation had something to do with Russia's entry into the Austro-Prussian Telegraphic Union. I have informed Collet of the FACTS. Perhaps you for your own part may be able to make use of them.

I am, Sir,

Your obedient servant, K. Marx