---
id: MECW41-205
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 5, 1862"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 March 1862"
year: 1862
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

Manchester, 5 March 1862

Dear Moor,

Enclosed POST OFFICE ORDER for *£2,* Camden Town. The book went off long ago, i.e. on 9 October, in a parcel to our agent E. Schröder in Amsterdam, and was enclosed in bale no. 118 for B. ter Haar and Son of that city. I enclosed a note to Schröder at the time, asking him to see to the thing. Everything was correctly addressed to your cousin;[2] so all he can do, if he hasn't got it yet, is approach Schröder.

You shall have the article.[3] The braggarts of the South are now getting a splendid thrashing. Most cheering of all is the reception met with everywhere by the gunboats on the Tennessee river as far up as Florence, Alabama (here the mussel shoals begin, disrupting navigation). So in west Tennessee, in the plains, the majority is also decidedly pro-Union. 15,000 prisoners, including Johnston, the Confederates' best general, who decided Bull Run by his rapid concentration on the centre, is no laughing matter.[4]

I shall be seeing Lupus this evening. If he can advance me something until 1 July, I shall get it for you. I myself shall be *au sec*[5] until then. Should there be [no] peace or some other settlement in America, it may well be that my total income from 1 July 1861-62 will be reduced to £100 and I shall thus run into debt. We have a whole heap of goods and can't sell a thing and, if we are saddled with them until matters in America have been straightened out, we are likely to lose all the profit made up till the end of December.[6] However, I imagine the scrap will continue, for I don't see how the fellows can make peace.

What's this about a Russian island off Korea?[7] And what's this about occupations in Java? (QUERY Japan?) *Je n'en sais rien.* How about the *Free Press?*

By the way, according to your figures, trade with China has surely increased significantly. 10 years ago, if I remember rightly, it alternated between 1 and 3 millions.

How is little Jenny? Warm regards to her, your wife and Laura.

Your

F. E.