---
id: MECW41-306
title: "Letter to Lion Philips, February 20, 1864"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "20 February 1864"
year: 1864
publication: "First published, in the languages of the original (German and English), in the magazine *International Review of Social History,* Vol. I, Part 1, Assen, 1956 First published in English in full in *The"
status: raw
---

MARX TO LION PHILIPS

IN ZALT-BOMMEL

London, 20 February [1864][1]

Dear Uncle,

I shall begin at the end. I arrived here yesterday ABOUT NOON in a frozen condition, FOR IT WAS DEVILISH COLD. My reception was all the warmer, and thus I enjoyed the delights inseparable from a complete contrast. *En passant,* yesterday and today were the coldest days there have been in London. So it seems I am fated to bring winter[2] not only to Bommel but also to London. I wish the Prussians in Schleswig-Holstein the full enjoyment of this 'seasonable weather'. If their patriotism or rather[3] their 'loyal and royal enthusiasm' is not cooled down by that, then, Sir, we must give it up!

Our little child[4] was quite enchanted by the really beautiful Dolly, Madame August[5] had chosen for her. I enclose some lines on the part of the child. She did not leave off bothering myself till I had promised her to enclose also for you a letter which she pretends to be written in Chinese characters and which an English friend has sent her.

[In Amsterd]am[6] I found the whole family well and cheerful. [August][7] was very busy and so I said [nothing] at all to him about financial matters. At the insurance office I was given thousand guilder notes, most of which I changed in Rotterdam, with Jacques'[8] help, into bills and ABOUT a quarter into BANKNOTES.

Nor, during the two days I was in Rotterdam, did Jacques have overmuch spare time. One day, he was pleading in a small town nearby and, the other, he had to attend a court of appraisal. On the whole, I should say that, since becoming engaged, he has had much more of AN EYE TO BUSINESS than previously. I don't doubt that in a few years' time he will have a sound practice, the more so since he likes legal work. He himself told me that he wins nearly all his doubtful cases, and, if he goes to the trouble of telling one something like that, he can be taken at his word. He and I laughed a great deal about a man whom he describes as '*the* client' *par excellence.* This man, he told me, was still young and, over the next 30 years OR MORE, might litigate away a lot more of his assets!

Incidentally, August also has a quite peculiar faith in the infallibility of the courts. He opines, for example, that the English lose nothing by the high cost of their legal procedure. People who didn't engage in litigation had just as much chance of obtaining justice as those who did. In point of fact, it seemed his opinion that dear law is as good as cheap law, and perhaps better; and he is a fellow who knows something about such things.

August gave me the 3 parts of the *Aardrijkskunde*[9] and, on top of that, Jacques provided me with a work on political economy (Dutch) by Vissering,[10] a professor at Leyden, and a copy of *Camera obscura.*[11] So I'm well stocked up with Dutch literature. Nothing in Frisian was to be had in Amsterdam, although in one bookshop alone there were works in 88 *modern* languages. The Negro languages seemed to have greater appeal to the Amster-damers than Frisian, but man always contrives to neglect the things that are nearest to him.

*Sorje Oppenheim*[12] which was already creating a great sensation in Amsterdam, has been performed here by my daughters to piano accompaniment and they hope to perform it one day before their uncle.

A great bundle of newspapers, etc., from various latitudes has accumulated for me here, but I am firmly resolved to know nothing of politics until Monday next.

Now, my dear uncle, I bid you farewell. Despite carbuncles and furuncles, I consider the two months I have lived in your house, as one of the happiest episodes of my life, and I shall always feel thankful for the kindness you have shown me.

You will, of course, tell Rothhäuschen[13] that I send him my compliments and that I regret having been forced giving battle to him.

My best compliments to the whole family, especially Jettchen,[14] Dr Anrooij, and Fritz.[15] Mrs Marx and the girls also send their compliments. Please to give the enclosed lines to Netchen.[16]

Yours truly,

Charles M.