---
id: MECW41-191
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 18, 1861"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "18 November 1861"
year: 1861
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 November [1861]

Dear Engels,

*Ecce Herum Crispinus!*)[1] Well, this is how matters now stand. On 9 November, I drew £16 on the *Tribune* for the 8 articles then sent. Out of this £16, I paid £3 apiece on account to butcher, baker, TEAGROCER, OILMAN, MILKMAN, and GREENGROCER. I spent 10/- on coal, which will all be gone by tomorrow. Your £5 went for the most part on the repayment of small cash loans. So, I'm broke, and there are further debts to be paid—the LANDLORD, school fees, the cobbler, and essential purchases for the family against the winter. I write for the *Presse* almost every day. With the *Presse* and the *Tribune* combined I might be able to make SHIFT. But in view of the constantly reaccumulating deficit (not a milliard, admittedly[2] and a whole year's loss of income this really can't be done.

Now there has been yet another disaster. As you know, I advanced Petsch & Co. £25 for the printing of *Vogt,* it being agreed that this was to be repaid out of the SALE of COPIES, before any other deductions. Moreover, they owe me a few pounds for *Hinter den Coulissen,*[3] the *Communist Trial*[4] and the *18th Brumaire*[5] etc.[6]

On the other hand, I obtained newspapers and books from the fellows to the value of £10 9/-, if only to be in possession of some security.

Koller (an *associé*)[7] has now had a row with Petsch, who is not in the business at present. There's a lawsuit pending between the two over the *firm's liquidation.*

The rascally Koller, whom I pressed about my claim, wrote instead advising me of his suit in the COUNTY-COURT regarding the £10 9/-. I went to see Zimmermann. He told me that my suit would cost me about £30-£60 in a SUPERIOR COURT, and that it would be better if I established my claim in the form of a counter-claim in the COUNTY-COURT, to which I had been summoned by Koller. Nor does he himself practise in the COUNTY-COURTS. SO, to this end, I shall have to see an English SOLICITOR before the week is out (and as soon as possible), which I can't do without CASH.

If I were quit of this wretched situation and did not see my family oppressed by MISERABLE adversities, how overjoyed I would be at the fiasco of the Decembrist financial system, so long and so frequently prognosticated by me in the *Tribune.* So William the Handsome or handsome William has done some plain speaking in Silesia: 'If you elect democrats, we shall be ruined.' 'Soldiers are the only answer to democrats.'

*Salut.* Your

K. M.