---
id: MECW41-142
title: "Letter to Carl Siebel, January 3, 1861 (1)"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "3 January 1861"
year: 1861
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

TO CARL SIEBEL IN ELBEREELD

London, 3 January 1861

9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,

Haverstock Hill

Dear Siebel,

HAPPY NEW YEAR! To you and your BETTER HALF. I must acknowledge with many thanks the arrival of my library,[1] ditto of your letter.

Of the 6 COPIES of *Herr Vogt* you ordered, will you kindly send one to the *Kölner Anzeiger*, one to the *Zeitung für Norddeutschland* (Hanover), 3 to any literary journals you please. The main thing is that you yourself should read through a copy and yourself do a notice of it.

As for the *Kölner Anzeiger*, you might use this little sheet as a weapon against the *Kölnische Zeitung*.

Sales of the book are going so well that Petsch is 'contemplating' a second edition. In such an event, it would be of the utmost importance that you should, if possible, supply me with *everything* that appears about it in Germany (I see nothing here but the *Allgemeine Zeitung*, the *Neue Preussische Zeitung*, and the *Volks-Zeitung*), and keep me *au courant*.[2]

Ed. Meyen has already vented a heartrending 'cry of pain' in the *Freischütz*.'[3] *Vivat sequens*!'[4]

Next time, you might try and find time to write to me at somewhat greater length.

I have been very unfortunate of late. My wife was dangerously ill for 5 weeks and I had to lodge the 3 children elsewhere.

As regards Schily, we'll knock some sense into him again.

*Salut*.

Your

K. Marx