---
id: MECW41-335
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 31, 1864"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "31 August 1864"
year: 1864
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 31 August 1864

DEAR Frederick,

I returned from Ramsgate[1] exactly three weeks ago today. The trip to Holland has fallen through, because a maid in my uncle's[2] household suddenly contracted smallpox.

Last week my wife had a severe attack of cholerine which did, for a spell, look like becoming dangerous. Yesterday she left for Brighton (solo).

I have sundry letters from Liebknecht here which, however, I shall not send as I don't know whether you are in Manchester. The enclosed scrawl by Collet[3] will amuse you, and, should you not be there, it doesn't really matter. What naïveté on C.'s part! Since (to use an Austrian construction) I had done a long article on the RUSSIAN CLAIMS for him, which he *didn't* print, he expects me to take an interest in his ridiculous rubbish.

The enclosed letter from Eisner is in reply to my wife's asking him for biographical notes on Lupus.[4]

I've been operative again for a couple of days. Before that I was still troubled with sickness and INCAPABLE. If you haven't left yet, let us know at once. We hope to see you on your way through at any rate. The children send you their love. Jenny can hardly wait to show you her GREENHOUSE.

I haven't yet quite made up my mind about the Schleswig-Holstein affair, and more facts will be needed before a clear picture can be gained of it. You were right when you predicted the rebirth of the Holy Alliance.[5] Bonaparte would seem to have a strong 'inclination AT LEAST' to make 'a fourth in the alliance'.[6] Since the outbreak of the Polish revolution to date, the utter despicability of the fellow has Manifested itself in the clearest and most genuine light.[7]

I've had an opportunity of looking at Grove's *Correlation of Physical Fqrces.* He is beyond doubt the most philosophical of the English (and indeed German!) natural scientists. Our friend Schleiden has an inborn-proclivity for *fadaise,*[8] although he, by mistake, discovered the cell.

Herewith) Pieper's card.[9] It accidentally fell into Liebknecht's hands and he has returned it to me.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Be so good as to send me Ernest Jones's Manchester address.

DON'T FORGET!