---
id: MECW41-026
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 14, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 February 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed a"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 February 1860

Dear FREDERICK,

Enclosed COPY of Vögele's affidavit[1] which I thought I had sent you on Saturday.[2]

Borkheim has handed me the manuscript of his narrative THE RISE, PROGRESS AND DECLINE of the *Brimstone Gang.*[3] He is, as I've already told you, FIRST clerk of a firm in Mark Lane; earns between £600 and £700 a year.

My correspondence with Schily is still going on, of course, since I have to CROSS-EXAMINE him on specific POINTS.

Did Lassalle post you Vogt's book?[4] In reply to his letter, I told the fool to address the thing to you.[5]

I expect to have an answer by telegraphic despatch tomorrow from Legal Counsellor Weber.[6]

There are a number of matters still to be settled tomorrow. If MEANS are available, I may *possibly* depart some time tomorrow. I can't say for certain, as unforeseen events may detain me a day longer. At any rate, make sure that I find *all the letters and PAPERS* thrown together in 'one great pile'.

The pitiable *Hermann* (apparently at the instigation of Kinkel, WHO IS ABOUT MARRYING AN ENGLISHWOMAN WITH £2-3000 A YEAR) did not publish the resolution adopted by the Workers' Society.[7] *Mais ces messieurs y penseront!*

The beastly *Telegraph* wrote to me again today and referred me to yesterday's piece by their beastly correspondent. I'll play the scoundrel a merry tune.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Have not yet heard anything from Papa Blind.