---
id: MECW41-209
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 28, 1862"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "28 April 1862"
year: 1862
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 28 April 1862

Dear Frederick,

My wife was discreet enough not to write to Dana. What the intention was is now unmistakably evident from the fact that the fellows don't even send me the *Tribune* any more.[2]

Enclosed letter from Friedländer. Arrived on Saturday.][3] Fine ideas these Germans have. I am to send him an article on the opening [of the exhibition[4], which, with the SEASON TICKET needed to this end, the clothes I'd have to buy and sundry incidental expenses, would cost me at least 10 guineas—and, IN EXCHANGE, the prospect of selling a total of 4 to 6 articles à £8 *(summa summarum*)[5], or, at very best, à £12. And, since one must always assume the minimum where these chaps are concerned, I should actually lose money on the 4 articles! I have written to tell him)[6] that I am confined to my room and cannot therefore send off on Thursday the desired inaugural sermon but shall, from time to time, submit a few articles on the exhibition along with the other ones. So far as the 'other' articles are concerned, the cat is now out of the bag.[7] 1 article per week (o £1), and even that is hedged about with somewhat hypothetical clauses. I must accept, of course, and have already accepted, since something is better than nothing at all. What the chaps are particularly interested in at the moment is America, and I should be grateful if you would send me an article (before the end of the week that is) on the progress of the war (I mean the battle of Corinth[8], and generally write to me from now on whenever military events take a new turn. If only to disseminate correct views on this important matter in the land of the Teutons. (I had already revised your earlier articles for them; were published, what's more.)[9]

In his new science, Vico says that Germany is the only country in Europe where an 'heroic tongue' is still spoken.[10] Had he had the pleasure of becoming acquainted with the Vienna *Presse* or the Berlin *National-Zeitung,* the old Neapolitan would have abandoned this preconceived idea.

On arriving in London,^897 I found a letter from my LANDLORD, in which he said he would call today (28 April) in order to get the rest of the £20. However, he can't have a centime. During my month's absence, the list of debts relating to IMMEDIATE NECESSITIES has, of course, grown. In addition, there are 2 extra items that must be paid for and are even more urgent than the LANDLORD. Firstly, £7 for the piano MASTER since, CIRCUMSTANCES being what they are, my wife had to give him notice and hence must also pay him. Secondly, £10's worth must be redeemed from the pawn-shop, whither have departed not only the children's things but also those of the maids, right down to their boots and shoes. Because of the LANDLORD, I have so far remained incognito *(excepto* Borkheim), so that my wife may tell him that I have not yet returned and attempt to put him off *indefinitely.* For it's a question of SHIFTING.

So far Borkheim has advanced £20; promises the remainder for the beginning of next week.[11]

My wife saw Dronke in the street with madame and offspring, but they didn't see her.

As regards *Ariadne, adhuc sub judice lis est.*[12] For the disputed point in this case is a legal one. In Diodorus[13] she figures as a star. I don't find her shown as a constellation. Rather, indeed, as a *planetoid,* No. 43, Plate II, *Mädler,* latest issue, 5th Edition (which I have), Berlin 1861. So, at all events, the girl is in the firmament. As things stand, it is a nice legal point as to whether you or Lupus have won. Your general contention that all those persons placed by the Greeks among the stars live on in the astronomical charts would also seem to be doubtful in the extreme.

What was it you wanted besides the English army ESTIMATES? AS soon as I am 'mobile' again, I shall see to the matter.

Kinkel has departed with his tail between his legs. He makes no reply. Instead, a line or two from his man Beta in which the swine attests that it was only after 6 months' urging on his part that Gottfried let him have the necessary biographical notes (which, from time immemorial, the said swine has been using regularly every 2 years) and the photograph, etc., at the request of Keil, editor of the *Gartenlaube.* But the real joke is that, *after* the MacDonald affair,[14] Keil and Beta (Juch has the relevant letter written by the last named and Eichhoff has seen it) refused to proceed with the matter, and it was only with difficulty that Gottfried engineered the final 'set-to'.[15] However, I am writing to Eichhoff, instructing him to drop the matter for the time being, since otherwise he'll take the edge off Gottfried's defeat.[16] For Juch is too cowardly to come out with Beta's letter. Otherwise, he would have already done so of his own accord in a note appended to the latter's statement.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Little Jenny is still far from being her proper self.[17] Our youngest[18] has been seriously ill but is now recovered. You should read the enclosed excerpts from Urquhart.[19]