---
id: MECW41-079
title: "Letter to Johann Philipp Becker, June 23, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 June 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER

IN PARIS

[London,] 23 June[1] 1860

Dear Becker,

Would you be so kind as to forward the enclosed letter to *Lommel?* I am sending it through you because I only have an address for Lommel in Geneva which no longer appears to be certain. At any rate, in his last few letters L. has neither mentioned the letters I sent him, nor answered my inquiry regarding the failure to arrive (should have come weeks ago) of a parcel he had advised me of.

Give Schily my kindest regards. I would ask you to arrange the letter Ranickel wrote him to be sent me as soon as possible.[2]

It was not until a day or two ago that I became capable of work again and I am still to a certain extent convalescent.

The publishers of the *Deutsche Zeitung,* which is to come out in Berlin at the beginning of July, have approached me through a third person[3] about contributions. I have not yet given them a definite answer. I am first asking for further particulars concerning the new organ's staff and politics. However, from the advertisements that have so far appeared in the papers it seems to me to be **pro-National Association**[4] and, or so a friend in Berlin[5] writes, it might be feasible to exert a strong external influence on its stand. Write and let me know if you and Schily would act as joint correspondents for the paper, which evidently has *fonds,* should you get an invitation to this effect either direct from Berlin or via London! I should like to have an answer about the matter *by return,* because I would not, of course, drop any hints to this effect in Berlin unless I was certain of your accepting in Paris.

One merit of About's pamphlet[6] is that the current Gotha catch-phrases are here officially adopted for Bonapartist use.

I haven't seen Sasonow over here. *Salut.*

Your

K. M.

I would ask you to send on the letter to Lommel as soon as possible.