---
id: MECW41-193
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, November 27, 1861"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "27 November 1861"
year: 1861
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 27 November 1861

Dear Moor,

Have the YANKEES gone quite out of their minds, playing such a mad trick on the CONFEDERATE COMMISSIONERS?[1] The FACT that even over here in the Channel, a warship was lying in wait for the MAIL STEAMER shows that general instructions had gone out from Washington. There could be no clearer *casus belli*[2] than to forcibly seize political prisoners on board a foreign vessel. The fellows must be completely crazy to saddle themselves with a war against England. If war should really break out, you could send your letters to New York *via* Germany or Le Havre, under cover to a third party, but you'll have to take care that you're not aiding and abetting the ENEMIES of the QUEEN.[3]

I was delighted to hear that Bakunin had bolted. The poor devil must have been very much the worse for wear. What a way to make a journey round the world!

Monsieur Bonaparte would also seem to get no money and Fould pretty well at his wits' end.[4] I can't help wondering what's going to happen there.

Things are going swimmingly in Russia and Poland, and now there's also a chance that good old Prussia may at long last be involved in a crisis, provided the electors don't allow themselves to be intimidated again.[5] But the purse, the purse! That may well serve to keep the few 'men of Progress' afloat a little while longer. In Cologne it is even rumoured that good old Heinrich Bürgers might stand for Parliament.

Varnhagen's *Tagebücher*[6] must be quite interesting. All the same, the fellow was a scurvy, cowardly knave. There was quite a witty article about the thing in the *Kreuz-Zeitung,*—full of spite and malice, of course.[7]

On 1 December, I shall send you another fiver. Many regards,

Your

F. E.