---
id: MECW41-019
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 7, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 February 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 7 February 1860
9 Grafton Terrace, etc.

Dear Engels,

Of the COPIES despatched to you,[1] send 1 to Dronke, 1 to Dr Bronner in Bradford. I have sent one to Borchardt myself.

The *D. T. (Daily Telegraph),* Monday's issue, p. 5, contained a filthy article (IN FACT, from Berlin, but dated Frankfurt a. M.)[2] based on the two in the *National-Zeitung.* I instantly threatened the dogs with a LIBEL action,^c and they will open their traps and apologise.

Letters from Fischel (there's another way of bringing a lawsuit, which actually involves no money), Lassalle (absurd in the extreme), Schily (interesting), etc. More details tomorrow.

I now have to pay the printing costs (will be ABOUT £\), £1 to be paid next Monday at the COUNTY-COURT, and shall need something, partly to get to Manchester with and partly so as to leave a modicum here. At the same time, before departing hence, I shall have to make, and get others to make, all manner of AFFIDAVITS.

Apropos. *Wiehe* is now going to state before the magistrate that he signed a *false DECLARATION* at the insistent request of Blind and Hollinger.[3]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Statements sent off yesterday to *Nat.-Zeit., Kölnische Zeitung, Volks-Zeitung, Publicist* (Berlin), *Reform,* Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung, Frankfurter Journal.* The statement was a brief one. Firstly, that I shall take legal proceedings against the *N.-Z.;* secondly, a reference to the English anti-Blind 'LIBEL'[4] enclosed with the statement.