---
id: MECW41-087
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 9, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "9 July 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 9 July [1860]

Dear Frederick,

As regards Meissner, the thing strikes me as somewhat dubious, since he is pretty well hand in glove with Vogt and Co. At any rate, I shan't send him a manuscript[1] unless he concludes a contract beforehand.

*What about Bohemia?* I must have it now, otherwise I shall be held up. Anyway, it need only be brief, you know.[2]

I should also like you to devote a few sentences to a discussion of the military inanities contained in the following utterances of Falstaff Vogt's.^c

1. This man, who has made such a detailed study of the relationship between 'Energy and Matter',[3] maintains that, within their *present* boundaries, the United Danubian Principalities are capable—*qua independent* kingdom—of forming a 'bulwark' against Russia and, indeed, of withstanding the Russians, Aus- trians and Turks.

2. As the main proof of Badinguet's^lb3 altruism and policy of non-conquest he puts forward the argument that, after the 'glorious' Crimean campaign/ he did not annex either 'Russian' or 'Turkish' territory.

I am still not yet quite fit. One day, I feel a bit better, the next day a bit worse.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Apropos. I have seen (thanks to a young ENGLISHMAN by the name of Green) a letter from Garibaldi in which he heartily reviles Bonaparte and hopes eventually to draw his sword against him.[4]