---
id: MECW41-081
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, June 25, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "25 June 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 25 June 1860

DEAR Frederick,

I am still 'very poorly', as red Wolff[1] used to say, though for the past week or so I've no longer been dosing myself. However, I am making 'forced marches' every day on Allen's orders and shall doubtless be fit again before the week is out.

Lina[2] is with us on 'holiday'. Will be here for ABOUT a month. Still no news from Siebel.

I would be grateful if, by Friday or Saturday,[3] you could [write] an article for the *Tribune* either on the DEFENCES OF ENGLAND, or on Garibaldi or on Indian TRADE. Since Wilson became the INDIAN CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER, the wretched *Economist* has said virtually nothing about India. Nor should you forget (although it won't yet be necessary *this* week) to let me have ABOUT a quarto page or so on the military *significance of Bohemia* to Germany or rather Russia, to whom Vogt proposes to cede her.[4]

*Apropos:* Have just received *Pro domo und Pro patria gegen Karl Vogt* by Jakob Venedey, Hanover 1860 (40 pages). Considering this fellow's point of view it is not altogether bad. Has some FACTS about Vogt's cowardice.

Jakob's passages relating to ourselves are as follows. A friend writes obligingly:

'It is disgraceful that in his triumph over the *Augsburg Zeitung*[5] and the "Brimstone Gang",[6] this man Vogt should also drag Venedey in his wake' (p. 4).

'No more than a word or two *pro domo.*[7] Could Karl Vogt have forgotten that all the stale, insipid morsels he dished up to his readers in his *Erklärung* against me—"noble Jakob", "blond soul", "imperial teardrop" and sundry other epithets—had been dished up ten years ago fresh, fragrant and seasoned with the spice of wit by Marx, Engels and company in the Rhenish newspaper.[8] Do I have to remind him that in the self-same article, 'Der Reichsregent',[9] which the Augsburger *[Allgemeine Zeitung]* used as the point of departure for its accusations against Vogt, this "dirty gang, a handful of malicious vagabonds in London", as Vogt describes it, gave battle along lines identical to those adopted by Vogt in his *Erklärung* against myself? Nevertheless, Karl Vogt did not feel that this prevented him from accusing me of having borrowed from Messrs Marx, Engels and company the "defamatory statements" I made about him. Vogt is well aware that, in jibing at me, he is simply repeating their words' (p. 7).

'This pamphlet of Vogt's'[10] about his lawsuit has all the air of a triumphal march and, indeed, Karl Vogt—not that he himself appears the more justified in consequence—has consigned to London in complete disarray the A. *A.* and likewise the "London Brimstone Gang'" (p. 6).

*Voilà tout.*[11] *Salut.*

Your

K. M.