---
id: MECW41-292
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, June 24, 1863"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 June 1863"
year: 1863
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Published in English for the first time in Marx"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 24 June 1863

Dear Moor,

I have absolutely no idea what the little BUSYBODY[1] wants. Why doesn't he write and tell me that he wants the matter settled *now?* He wrote and told *me* that, *if I didn't reply,* he would draw on me as arranged. So far as I'm concerned, if a matter is settled, it's settled and I therefore thought it totally unnecessary to send him another written assurance a fortnight before the date stating that I would do what I had already undertaken to do, both verbally and in writing. Basing myself on *your* letter, which casts quite a different light on his motives, I have now written to him as requested.[2] My acceptance will be for £250. Make sure he sends you the *whole amount,* since he has undertaken to pay the expenses and interest himself.

Have finished Kinglake.[3] Never before has there been anything as superficial (though some of the material is very good, if scrappy), stupid and ignorant as his Battle of the Alma. Only *la part des français*[4] is well and accurately depicted—in general, at least. Otherwise, much that is highly amusing to the military reader.[5]

Things are going rottenly in Poland. The Polish government's grand effect, the mass uprising in June, has obviously come to grief[6] owing to a shortage of weapons and, failing any external imbroglios, a gradual decline is now inevitable.

Your policy in regard to Izzy is quite right. Besides, what's the use of all this camaraderie towards a chap who either finds himself compelled by circumstances to go along with us at a crucial moment, or else openly becomes our enemy. To allow the fool to steal one's ideas for years on end and be rewarded for it by having to answer for all his stupidities—that's a bit too much.

Someone has sent for me.

Your

F. E.