---
id: MECW41-116
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Lassalle, October 23, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 October 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in: *F. Lassalle. Nachgelassene Briefe und Schriften,* Bd. III, Stuttgart-Berlin, 1922 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collecte"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FERDINAND LASSALLE

IN BERLIN

[London,] 23 October 1860

Dear Lassalle,

You will forgive me for writing no more than a few lines. Apart from my usual preoccupations, I am just now snowed under with proof-sheets.

I should be *greatly* obliged if you could let me have such money as you are able to send by the beginning of November, since I have given the printer (as a matter of fact, printers in London are paid *by the week)* an I.O.U. payable at the beginning of November.

Today I received a final nonsuit from the Supreme Tribunal. It reads:

'Your appeal of August 23 of this year against the ruling on July 11 of this year of the Criminal Senate of the Royal High Court in the action for libel brought by Dr. K. Marx against Dr. Zabel, editor of the *National-Zeitung,* is hereby dismissed as without foundation after consideration of the relevant documents. For the Royal High Court did not find *an objective defamation of the plaintiff* in the two leading articles of the *Nat.-Zeit,* in question, nor did it find that there was *an intention to insult the plaintiff.* It was right, *therefore,* to refuse permission to proceed with the proposed action for libel.

'The question whether there is an objective act of defamation, or an intention to insult, essentially pertains to matters of fact and the conclusions regarding them can only be disputed by an appeal to the Royal Supreme Tribunal if the decision of the Appeal judge is based on an error in law. However, such an error is not evident in the present instance. The costs, etc'

How is your health? Mine is still pretty precarious. *Salut.*

Your

K. M.