---
id: MECW41-025
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 13, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 February 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Printed a"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 13 February 1860

DEAR FREDERICK,

The book[1] arrived today. Nothing but shit. Sheer tripe. Luckily, the worthy *National-Zeitung* has reprinted in its two leaders (No. 37 and No. 41) *all* the passages which are actionable and in which all the scurrilities are concentrated.

Today (on receiving a second letter from Fischel), I at once sent Legal Counsellor *Weber* (the leading lawyer in Berlin) an indictment together with a retaining fee of 15 talers *(£2* 10sh).[2]

The case would have cost me *nothing* if, instead of instituting a private action for libel, I had had recourse to the Royal Prussian Public Prosecutor, but as I wrote and told Fischel,[3] I could not expect the Royal Prussian Public Prosecutor to 'display especial zeal in upholding the honour of my name'. Moreover, the whole procedure costs very little.

Of the *£5* you sent me, £2 10 has therefore gone to Weber, *£1* today to the COUNTY-COURT, 5/—to Vögele and 2/—on the two AFFIDAVITS he made;[4] also a LOT on stamps for letters. Before going to the CITY today I had to borrow a further *£1* from a baker, repayable on Wednesday.

Luckily, Urquhart has written Collet a rude letter in which he lashes out at him for sending me the PRINTER'S BILL.[5] This (i.e. my publication) was, he said, an expense chargeable to his agitational activities. So I don't have to pay *him. Tomorrow* I shall be faced with yet another *expense* and I don't know how I'm going to meet it. For I have got to call on that bastard Zimmermann *(from Spandau,* a Vogtian and, at the same time, an *advocate to the Austrian Embassy)* so that he can supply me with the wording for the power of attorney which must go off to Weber *without delay.* There's no time to be lost, you see, because actions of this kind become 'statute-barred' remarkably quickly in Prussia.

In addition to the *Volks-Zeitung,* the Berlin *Publicist* has published my statement,^2 the latter having placed it alongside an extract from the English anti-Blind circular.[6] This last I have today sent to Louis Blanc and Félix Pyat, together with the AFFIDAVITS of Wiehe[7] and Vögele.

The *Kölnische Zeitung* and the *N.-Z.* did not publish my statement.[8]

Mr F. Freiligrath—whom (with seeming benevolence) I shall compromise in no mean fashion—did not even acknowledge receipt of the things I sent him.

You must surely have got my last important communication?[9]

After I've settled the matter of the power of attorney tomorrow, I shall leave on Wednesday[10] (having notified you beforehand) for Manchester where, in addition to our indispensable meeting, I have business connected with Roberts.

You will have gathered from the foregoing that I'm now stone-broke.

Your

K. M.