---
id: MECW41-202
title: "Letter to Johann Philipp Becker, February 26, 1862"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 February 1862"
year: 1862
publication: "First published abridged in *Die Neue Zeit,* Jg. VI, No. 11, 1888 and in full in Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English in full for the first time"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JOHANN PHILIPP BECKER[1]

IN GENEVA

London, 26 February 1862

Dear Becker,

You must attribute my prolonged silence to one thing only—my inability to help. The American civil war has meant the total loss of my principal source of income for a whole year. Subsequently (a couple of months ago), this 'business' was resumed, but on a very 'restricted' basis.[2] So far as acquaintances are concerned, however, I can count very few who have any means at their disposal. E. g., it is some while since that I wrote to Siebel on your behalf[3] but I am told by Borkheim that he gave no signs of life. In Manchester, a few 'revolutionary adventurers, who were sailing to the United States for the good cause,' had scraped the bottom of the barrel.

Now, as regards the subscription to your work,,'[4] I shall do *my utmost* but can hold out little hope. All the riff-raff in the associations here—with the exception of the Workers' Educational Society,^3 which has nothing in the way of *funds—* is *constitutional,* and actually favours the Prussian National Association.[5] The fellows would sooner give money to have a work like yours suppressed. As you probably know, these Germans, both young and old, are all of them pert men of sterling worth and practical insight, and look upon people like you and me as immature fools who have still not recovered from their revolutionary fancies. Nor is the riff-raff at home any better than it is abroad. The time I spent in Berlin,[6] etc., convinced me that any attempt to influence the canaille by *literary* means would prove utterly futile. The fellows' self-complacent stupidity, which possesses in its press— that pitiable press—an extraordinary elixir of life, is beyond belief. And then the spiritual passivity to boot—nothing short of a *sound thrashing* would reanimate your stolid German who, having lost his philosophical illusions and applied himself to money-making and 'Little Germany' and 'practical constitutional- ism', is now no better than an impulsive CLOWN. So far as I'm concerned, Germany may altogether [...][7] but a roomful of precocious and decrepit children."[8]

The *Hermann* is the property of the erstwhile Royal Prussian Procurator Heintzmann: 'with God for King and Fatherland', 'a modicum of Little Germany' and moderation in the exercise of freedom. A namesake of yours, one Becker from Leipzig, who writes for that paper, is a good chap but not influential enough to help us in a matter such as a subscription. Engels only returned to Manchester a few days ago after an absence of several months. He and Wolff (of Breslau)[9] will do what they can. However, with the exception of the above-named and 3 or 4 others, the numerous German population in Manchester consists of the same philistines as it does here and everywhere else.

*Quoad* 'Vogt', do with it as you please. It goes without saying, of course, that I could not but be *delighted* if the pamphlet which the press has all but killed by silence in Germany, could be used to some effect at least in Switzerland. A French translation was made in Paris, without my previous knowledge, and was already being printed but *vanished* by supreme imperial ukase.[10]

So, in fact, there is *no* French edition.

Let me assure you, my dear friend, that nothing could be more painful to me than to have to stand by helpless and passive and witness the struggles of a man such as yourself. I admire your steadfastness, your fervour, and your energy. The Ancients—I think it was Aeschines—said that one should endeavour to acquire worldly goods so that one might help one's friends in need! What profound and humane wisdom lies therein!

At the earliest possible opportunity I shall let you know the result of communications to various persons about the subscrip- tion.

In the meantime, farewell. My wife asks to be kindly remem- bered to you.

Yours

K. M.