---
id: MECW41-149
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 22, 1861"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "22 January 1861"
year: 1861
publication: "First published in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930. Printed according to the original. Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 January [1861]

Dear Frederick,

Today I promptly sent off two COPIES (one to *The Times,* one to the *Standard)* of the statement about the AMNESTY.[1]

What do you think of the statement by Bucher *et cie?*[2]

You will have seen in the Prussian press how Gottfried[3] is again pushing himself into the foreground via the newspaper mob.

The advertisement (bookseller's) for my book has also appeared in the *Neue Preussische Zeitung.* This week it has again been sent to *all* the Berlin papers. The scoundrels on both sides intend to burke the thing.

As to my condition, Allen is of the *same* view as Gumpert. But, whatever it may be, it is a highly disgusting condition, which incapacitates one for work. There is also some attendant physical pain, though today it's much better. I'm still taking medicine and Allen calls every three days. He was here again today. Riding, CHANGE OF AIR, etc. But I can't, of course, tell him where the shoe pinches. I have wondered off and on whether I might not fix something up with a LOAN SOCIETY through Borkheim so as to put my affairs in some sort of order, these having become much disorganised as a result of medical expenses, the impossibility of drawing on the *Tribune,* etc. But each time I get to the point, my heart sinks into my boots, for Borkheim (despite all his GOOD QUALITIES) is a braggart and every day—or rather each time I see him—he goes on about the money he is owed by refugees.

If you could send me an article whenever you have the time and the inclination [it would][4] be very welcome. I am still INCAPABLE. Most welcome of all would be an article from you for Saturday[5] on French armaments,[6] or on things French generally.

In my view there is *no* alliance between Russia on the one hand and Prussia and Austria on the other. It's simply that Russia, who always protects herself on two sides, has concluded certain agreements (relating to Poland and the Danubian Principalities) with the chaps in Warsaw;[7] but it's also *quite certain* that she has struck a new bargain with Bonaparte against other 'contingen- cies'.

Apropos: It might, perhaps, be even better if you wrote about Schleswig-Holstein.[8] One point: the foul behaviour of the Berlin press, which constantly abuses Austria for 'impeding' Prussia's anti-Danish moves. Now that Austria has given its consent, it wails about 'snares', issues warnings, urges peace, etc. *Vide Volks-Zeitung, Kölnische Zeitung,* etc. See that you lay about the Berlin press. In the past I used to do so frequently in the *Tribune.* But it has to be constantly repeated.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.