---
id: MECW41-189
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 6, 1861"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 November 1861"
year: 1861
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. Ill, Bd. 3, Berlin, 1930 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 6 November 1861

Dear Frederick,

You must excuse me for my failure to send a more prompt acknowledgement of the £5, ditto the wine. Very many thanks for both. It so happened that I have been very busy of late, on top of which I have had a great deal of domestic BOTHER.

Once again, the *Tribune's* front page calls attention to an article of mine as 'MOST INTERESTING'.[1] Odd the way these YANKEES[2] hand out *testimonia* to their own CORRESPONDENTS. I had an answer from my old lady[3] yesterday. 'Soft' words, BUT NO CASH. She also tells me what I have long known, namely that she is 75 and is suffering from many of the infirmities of old age.

Up till now I have also been vainly trying to raise a LOAN over here. The guarantors I was able to produce were not, as I had in any case already suspected, sufficiently respectable. Many chaps have been more fortunate in this line. E.g. that scoundrel Beta got £50 out of a LOAN society on the guarantee of Mr—Edgar Bauer!

Russia's goings-on in Poland aren't bad at all. No less nice are the GESTS and EXPLOITS of handsome William.^3D9

You may perhaps have seen from the German, or also from some of the English newspapers, with what persistent importunity citizen and statesman Blind is 'blossoming' into a German Mazzini.[4]

Apropos. While you were away,^3fi0 I received *avis.[5] * from Holland that Lassalle's books[6] had *not* been received by my cousin[7] Perhaps you would be so good as to make inquiries about it.

Write soon, for I have an especial need of your letters during what is still a highly critical interlude for me.

If you have a moment, could you write me a report on the Armstrong controversy^361 for the *Presse?*

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.