---
id: MECW41-203
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, February 28, 1862"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "28 February 1862"
year: 1862
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1923 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 28 February 1862

Dear Moor,

Today I am sending you, CARRIAGE PAID, a case containing: 8 bottles of claret, 4 bottles of old, 1846, hock, 2 bottles of sherry. I haven't any port that would suit the circumstances. I trust it will do Jenny good. Poor child! However, I don't imagine that the

[1]

thing is of any consequence. She has grown a lot and, with care and exercise, will doubtless regain her strength.

I shall get the £2 for Koller[2] off to you tomorrow or on Monday.[3]

This year, I am spending more than my income. The crisis is affecting us badly,[4] we have no orders, and, starting from next week, shall be working merely half-time. Nevertheless, I have to get hold of the £50 for Dronke within 4 weeks and next week there's a year's rent to be paid for my lodgings. I'm moving out; this morning that damned Sarah[5] stole the money from my coat pocket. So, don't address *anything more* to Thorncliffe Grove. I'm living with Mary nearly all the time now so as to spend as little money as possible; unfortunately, I can't dispense with my LODGINGS, otherwise I should move in with her altogether. I haven't got any new lodgings as yet and shall have to go and look for some.[6] Write again soon and let me know how things are going. What is the *Tribune* up to?[7]

Would you like a military article on America for the *Presse?*

The numbers of *The Free Press* I am short of are October- February 1861/62.

Best wishes to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.