---
id: MECW41-044
title: "Letter to J. M. Weber, March 27, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "27 March 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO J. M. WEBER

IN BERLIN

London, 27 March 1860
9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park,
Haverstock Hill

Sir,

I am enclosing herewith the *last* two documents needed to complete what has already been sent. The *first* is a letter from the editor-in-chief of the *New-York Tribune* to me.[1] I have included a German translation.

The *second* document is highly important in that it proves that the wretched Cherval, *alias* Nugent, *alias* Cramer, far from being in touch with me when he was *in Geneva,* was hounded out of that city as a result of my book about the Communist trial in Cologne.[2]

The letter is from Johann Philipp Becker in Paris (Becker fled after the affair of 1830/31, in 1848/49 he first commanded the volunteers in Baden, then he was colonel of the revolutionary army in Baden and the Palatinate; he is now a business man in Paris and, so to speak, the doyen of the German émigrés) and is directed to Rheinländer, a merchant in London, with whom he has business connections. Mr Rheinländer, who is an acquaintance of mine, was good enough to let me have the letter.

Apart from this letter, I have also sent you:

1. Dated 21 Feb. Power of attorney, together with enclosures.

2. Dated 24 Feb. A letter, together with enclosures.

3. Dated 3 March. Two packages with enclosures.[3]

I now look forward to receiving by return of post, firstly, a confirmation that these various letters, etc., have arrived, secondly, some news about the progress of the libel suit.

I am, Sir,

Your most obedient Servant,

Dr Karl Marx