---
id: MECW41-055
title: "Letter to Mór Perczel, April 16, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "16 April 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in Hungarian in *Parttörténeti Közlemények,* No. 4, Budapest, 1966 and in the language of the original (German) in: Marx, Engels, *Werke,* Bd. 39, Berlin, 1973 Published in English for"
status: raw
---

MARX TO MÖR PERCZEL

IN ST HÉLIÉR

London, 16 April 1860
9 Grafton Terrace, Maitland Park, Haverstock Hill

Dear General,

In furtherance of a work I intend to publish on Bonapartist machinations,[1] I am taking the liberty of addressing myself to you as one of the most vigorous champions of European liberty. During the recent war in Italy you issued a statement in which you showed that you had seen through the humbug and had therefore made a timely exit from the stage—proof, if proof were needed, of your superiority to that clown, Kossuth, and his sycophants. Having unfortunately lost that statement, I had recourse to Szemere in Paris.[2] He referred me to you. Hence, if you would be so kind as to let me have a copy of the said statement, together with your comments on the deception practised on the Hungarians in Italy, you would be doing a service to the good cause.

As early as last summer (1859), in articles of mine which appeared in the *New-York Tribune* and the *London Free Press*,[3] I mentioned your name as that of the only military representative of the Hungarian emigration not to have succumbed to the bribes and wiles of the diplomats of France and Russia, or allowed himself to be impressed by Kossuth's phantasmagoria, and, in the new book I propose to write, I should be glad to allot you the place of honour that befits you.

I am taking the liberty of reminding you that, as early as 1848-49, when Editor-in-Chief of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung,* I was the most determined advocate of revolutionary Hungary in Germany. Now, as then, I consider *Hungary's independence and sovereignty to be the conditio sine qua of Germany's release from slavery.* But with no less determination do I reject the endeavour to debase the *nationalities* by using them as a cloak for Muscovite-Decembrist intrigue. I am, Sir, etc.

Yours,

Dr Karl Marx