---
id: MECW41-105
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 15, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "15 September 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1923 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 15 September 1860

Dear Engels,

THANKS FOR THE ARTICLE. I enclose herewith Eichhoff's piece[1] which, however, you must return to me intact within 2 or 3 days at the outside. *It doesn't belong to me.* The scrawl had no sooner come out than it was confiscated in Berlin. This copy is the only one to be had in London. Part II, about Patzke, etc., so badly written, is excruciatingly funny. Moreover, it shows you what those stinking courts of justice in Berlin are like. And the infamous press there, venting all of its liberal leonine courage on Bombalino and reserving none for its Patzke, its tribunals and its utterly contemptible Prince Regent.[2]

Garibaldi is a veritable godsend. OTHERWISE, Bonaparte would have been restored to popularity and sustained by the Russo-Prussian-Austrian Holy Alliance.

Our gentle Heinrich Bürgers—but you'll see this for yourself from the enclosed epistle from Lassalle (also to be returned)—has gone over to the Prince Regent. Lassalle wrote to me first, from Aachen, where he is taking the waters for *gout.* Amongst other things, he says that in Cologne and Düsseldorf, where the Workers' Associations have been reorganised under the leadership of two young barristers unknown to us, my anti-Vogt piece[3] is eagerly awaited. Borkheim brought back the same news from Switzerland. In reply to Lassalle's pressure, I told him[4] that all we can hope for (and such, judging by Siebel's letters, is the case) is to get the printing done in London, whence Petsch would transact business in Germany through the usual channels (Leipzig), and in other countries direct. To this end, I wrote, *money* is needed. Next I get the fellow's letter. But he won't get off so easily. I'm writing to him again today.[5] He'll have to disgorge at least £30 by way of *conscience-money.* Borkheim is contributing £12. Thus, the major part of the expenses would already be met. Herewith a specimen proof from Hirschfeld. It would amount to £4 10/- a sheet. But there'd be as much on it as on two ordinary sheets. Take a look at the final pages of the conclusion to L.'s endless letter, where he lavishes much praise on my political economy.[6] He would seem *not* to have understood much of its economics—as is plainly evident from the way he expresses himself.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

*Apropos.* The *Neue Preussische Zeitung* says the *Demokratische Studien* (Walesrode, Bamberger, Lassalle, Vogt, Grün, Oppenheim, etc.) were written by 8 genuine and 2 'artificial' Jews.