---
id: MECW41-065
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 8, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 May 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 May 1860

Dear Frederick,

Reiff is a scoundrel. No one sent him up to Manchester. He disappeared from here after he had been exposed. He was thrown out of the League[1] back in 1850. During the preliminary investigation at the Cologne trial^2 he actually turned traitor. I've just found a letter of Bermbach's which refers to this.[2] So, have nothing to do with him.

As to your pamphlet,^1 you'll have found something in Fischel's letter. By the by, in your place I shouldn't hesitate to exploit friend Siebel's minor literary connections (as soon as he's up and about again, that is) for the purpose of combating the *conspiration du silence.* Had you actually put your name to the pamphlet, the public would have seized upon it, if only out of curiosity. Behrend, by the by, seems to be even worse than Duncker.

Szemere is a man who likes to ask others to do him a service, but who keeps his own pocket-flaps buttoned. You have now done enough for him and, if I were you, I would leave his wine to its *mission toute patriotique*.[3]

I don't much care for the SETTLEMENT with G. Ermen. The question is, whether your family is or is not leaving any capital in the business. If the former, it might provide a vantage point from which to negotiate.

From your letter it would appear that you are once again going to cancel or postpone your trip down here. Considering how rapid communications are, you ought really to be able to spare a couple of days.

What do you think of the Sicilian business?

Things in Vienna are said to be very revolutionary. The English are, of course, now plaguing us with talk about Brück. The day before yesterday a chap was again badgering me about it. He asked: 'Now. WHAT DO YOU SAY OF BRUCK'S SUICIDE?' 'I'LL TELL YOU, SIR. IN AUSTRIA THE ROGUES CUT THEIR OWN THROATS, WHILE IN ENGLAND THEY CUT THEIR PEOPLE'S PURSES.'

Borkheim has just written to me from Dublin. He will be arriving in Manchester on Saturday[4] evening and will come and see you on Sunday.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.