---
id: MECW41-099
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 27, 1860"
volume: 41
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "27 August 1860"
year: 1860
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 41"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 27 August 1860

Dear Engels,

You can attribute my long silence to the persistently frightful state of my liver, as a result of which I have to devote every spare moment to work.

I wrote to Siebel *re* publishers ABOUT ten days ago)[1] and await his reply. The long delay is due partly to my relative inability to work and partly to the fact that it was not till recently that I had all the available material. By the by, I believe that, with the exception of the Italian affair[2] (Austria's craving for intervention was a Bonapartist figment), nothing more is going to happen this year (write SOMETHING about Garibaldi. What do you think of Bangya's friend Türr?[3], so there'll be an interim period during which pamphlets of this kind will still be readable.

The enclosed letter from Schily will tickle you very much. *Let me have it back.* Today I sent Schily your *Nice, Savoy, etc.*

ABOUT a fortnight ago I sent Dr Zimmermann (formerly chairman of a Prussian Municipal Court) a letter, in which I put to. him questions relating to my case (questions of form).[4] However, he deemed it necessary to confer with other brethren of the same craft in Berlin. No doubt I shall get his written opinion in the course of this week. I shan't allow the Prussians to get off so lightly.

I'm in a great fix over money. Mr Weydemeyer's journal[5] is already at an end; i.e. he has resigned from the editorial board and intends to go to New York as a SURVEYOR. However, his colleague[6] is going to make the paper pay by *selling* it to a political party. Weydemeyer has at last come to realise that he's too honest for American journalism.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

How's business in Manchester? India? HOME MARKET?