---
id: MECW02-118
title: "Friedrich Engels Senior to Karl Snethlage, October 5, 1842"
volume: 2
doc_type: article
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 October 1842"
year: 1842
publication: "First published in Archiv für Sozial geschichte, Bd. IX, 1969  Printed according to the journal  Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 2"
status: raw
---

IN BERLIN

(Fragment)

Barmen, October 5, 1842
I found your letter on my return from Engelskirchen, where I spent a while and where I am thinking of going again tomorrow. I thank you also heartily for your letter, and in particular for what you told me about Friedrich. It was nothing new to me, I have known since childhood his tendency to extremes and was convinced, although he never wrote to me about his views since he was in Bremen, that he would not keep to those ordinarily held. We had decided to deal with him exactly in the way that you advise. I shall make clear to him that merely for his sake or because of his presence I shall neither change nor conceal my views, either in respect of religion or of politics; we shall continue entirely our former way of living and read the word of God and other Christian books in his presence. I shall not argue with him, for that would only lead to obstinacy and embitterment. His conversion must come from above. I know for certain that he was moved by pious feelings at his confirmation and I am confident that a person who has once felt the force of God's word in his heart cannot for long be satisfied with the vapid new systems. He may, however, have to travel a rough road before he is obliged to climb down from the height of his pride and submit his heart in humility to the powerful hand of God. But God grant that this time is not too far away, let us pray to Him for that! Until then it is hard to bear having a son in the house who is like a black sheep in the flock and adopts a hostile attitude to the faith of his fathers. By the way, I hope to be able to give him a fair amount of work, and wherever he may be I shall watch over him unnoticed with the greatest care so that he does not take any dangerous step. The most depressive is that the trend which Friedrich has embraced is becoming or seems almost to be generally prevalent. Friedrich himself does not suspect what influence such a fashionable trend has exerted over him, whom I have always found greatly inclined to imitation. We all often find a fashion in dress outwardly strange at the beginning, but as it spreads more we accustom ourselves to it, and in the end one can hardly understand any longer how one could tolerate the former fashion. And now that all are preaching progress and that the old faith and the old mentality are consigned to the rubbish heap, how easily a young and spirited heart can be ensnared!—Oh, this progress and this modern wisdom, where will they lead to! I fear our good King,[1] who is still adored, will yet have to hear things which will not be to his taste. In Königsberg they now intend to tackle your minister[2] in earnest; I cannot but warn you not to advise too strict measures in your present situation, for there too things will have to be left to God and time. I mean this kindly, and naturally expect no objection.