---
id: MECW18-077
title: "Bülow"
volume: 18
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "31 March 1858"
year: 1858
publication: "First published in The New American Cyclopaedia, Vol. IV, 1859 Reproduced from The New American Cyclopaedia Source : Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 18"
status: raw
---

As can be seen from Marx's letter to Engels of February 22 and Engels' letters to Marx of February 24 and March 4, 11, 16 and 17, 1858, they intended to write the article "Bülow" together. Engels, who as usual had undertaken to elucidate the military aspect of the biography, looked through several works on the history of the Napoleonic wars (including those of A.H. Jomini, G. Cathcart and W. Siborne) but did not find enough information there. On March 19 Marx told Engels to cease collecting material for the article, informing him that he would write it himself since he had sufficient material about the man for a brief biography. Marx's excerpts from Meyer's Conversations-Lexicon (Vol. 6, Hildburghausen, Amsterdam, Paris and Philadelphia, 1843) are extant (see this volume, pp. 402-03).

Bülow, Friedrich Wilhelm, Count von Dennewitz, a Prussian general, born Feb. 16, 1755, died Feb. 25, 1816. At the earliest period of Napoleon's European wars, he was engaged against him. In 1808 he was made a general of brigade. In 1813 he was ennobled for his victories at Möckern,)[1] Luckau, Gros-Beeren, and Dennewitz.[2] He subsequently distinguished himself in Westphalia, Holland, and Belgium, and contributed essentially (as Wellington warmly acknowledged[3] to the victorious close of the battle of Waterloo,[4] in which he commanded the 4th division of the allied army.