---
id: MECW17-014
title: "II. The Bristlers"
volume: 17
doc_type: article
status: raw
---

*"But, sirrah, there's no room for faith, truth,*

*nor honesty in this bosom of thine; it is all filled*

*up with guts and midriff."*

(*Shakespeare*)[1]

"*Bristlers*" **or** "*Brimstone Gang*" is what it says in the original Biel gospel ("Magnum Opus", Documents, p. 31). "*Brimstone Gang*" **or else** "*Bristlers*" is what we find in the "Magnum Opus" (p. 136).[2]

According to both versions the "Brimstone Gang" and the "Bristlers" are one and the same gang. The "Brimstone Gang" was, as we have seen, dead and buried by the middle of 1850. Therefore the "Bristlers'' too? Our "well-rounded character" is the civilising agent attached to the December Gang, and civilisation, according to Fourier, is distinguished from barbarism by the fact that in it lies simple are replaced by lies composite.[3]

Our "composite" Imperial Falstaff informs us ("Magnum Opus", p. 198) that a certain *Abt* is the "lowest of the low". What admirable self-effacement: Vogt puts himself in the positive, but his Abt in the superlative, appointing him, as it were, his Field Marshal Ney. When Vogt's original gospel appeared in the Biel *Commis voyageur*,[4] I requested the editors of *Das Volk*[5] to reprint the original rigmarole without further comment. Despite this they followed the reprint with this note:

"The above rigmarole stems from the pen of a dissolute creature called *Abt*, who, eight years ago in Geneva, was unanimously found guilty of a variety of dishonourable actions by a court of honour of German refugees" (*Das Volk*, No. 6, June 11, 1859).

The editors of *Das Volk* took Abt for the author of Vogt's original rigmarole; they forgot that Switzerland had two Richmonds in the field[6] *a Vogt, as well as an Abt*.

In the spring of 1851, then, the "lowest of the low" invented the "*Bristlers*", whom Vogt pilfered from his Field Marshal in the autumn of 1859. The sweet habit of plagiarism acquired in making books on natural history instinctively clings to him in those dealing with his police activities. For a time the President of the Workers' Association in Geneva had been a brushmaker [*Bürstenmacher*] called *Sauernheimer*. Abt bisected Sauernheimer's profession and name, took the beginning of the former and the end of the latter and from the two halves thus obtained he ingeniously formed the whole: "*Bürstenheimer*" [Bristler]. This title he originally bestowed on *Sauernheimer*, as well as on his closest friends: *Kamm* from Bonn, a brushmaker by trade, and also **Ranickel**, a bookbinder's apprentice from Bingen. He appointed Sauernheimer general and Ranickel adjutant of the Bristlers, while Kamm became a Bristler *sans phrase*. Later, when two refugees belonging to the Workers' Association in Geneva, *Imandt* (who is at present professor at the college in Dundee) and *Schily* (a lawyer, formerly of Trier, now in Paris), brought about Abt's expulsion at the hands of a court of honour of the Association, Abt published an abusive pamphlet,[7] in which he elevated the whole Workers' Association in Geneva to the rank of "*Bristlers*". It is clear, then, that there were Bristlers in general and Bristlers in particular. "*Bristlers*" in general included the Genevan Workers' Association, the same association which Vogt tricked into giving him a *testimonium paupertatis* which was published in the *Allgemeine Zeitung*[e] at a time when he had been driven into a corner, the same association on which he fawned during the celebrations in memory of Schiller and Robert Blum (1859). "Bristlers" in particular were, as I have mentioned, Sauernheimer, who is totally unknown to me and who has never been to London; Kamm who, having been turned out of Geneva, went to the United States via London, where he looked up Kinkel and not me; and finally *Ranickel*, or **the Ranickel**[f], who remained as the adjutant of the Bristlers in Geneva where he "congregated" around our "well-rounded character". And indeed, in his own person he represents the proletariat in Vogt's eyes. As I shall have more to say about *the Ranickel* later on, here are a few preliminary facts about the beast. *Ranickel* took part in Hecker's ill-starred campaign and after its defeat he joined the detachment of refugees under Willich in Besançon[8] Still under Willich he went through the campaign for the Imperial Constitution after which he fled with him to Switzerland. Willich was in his eyes the communist Mohammed who would bring about the millennium with fire and sword. A vain, long-winded, foppish melodramatic actor, *the Ranickel* was more tyrannical than the tyrant. In Geneva he raged in a red fury against the "parliamentarians" in general and, like a second Tell, against the "Land-Vogt" in particular, whom he threatened to "strangle". But when he was introduced to Vogt by Wallot, a refugee from the thirties and a boyhood friend of Vogt's, *Ranickel's* thirst for blood dissolved in the milk of human kindness[g]. "*That* fellow was *the Vogt's*," as Schiller says.[h]

The adjutant of the Bristlers became the adjutant of General Vogt, who has only failed to achieve military renown because Plon-Plon thought the Neapolitan captain *Ulloa* (another general by courtesy[i] bad enough for the task his "*corps de touristes*" had to perform in the Italian campaign, and so held his Parolles in reserve for the great adventure with "the lost drum" that will unfold on the Rhine.[9] In 1859 Vogt promoted his *Ranickel* from the proletariat to the middle classes, obtained a business for him (*objets d'art*, bookbinding and stationery) and in addition procured for him the custom of the Geneva Government. The adjutant of the Bristlers now became Vogt's "maid of all work"[j] his Cicisbeo, intimate friend, Leporello, confidant, correspondent, gossip-bearer and scandal-monger, but above all, after the Fall of our Fat Jack[k], he acted as his spy and as recruiting officer for Bonaparte among the workers. A Swiss paper recently reported the discovery of a third species of hedgehog, viz., the Ran or Rhine hedgehog [*Ran- oder Rhein-Igel*] which combines the qualities of both the canine and porcine varieties in itself and which has been found in a hole on the River Arve, the country-seat of Humboldt-Vogt. Was this ***Ran-Igel*** aimed at our ***Ranickel***?

N.B. The only refugee in Geneva with whom I had any contact was *Dr. Ernst Dronke*, a former co-editor of the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung*[10] and at present a businessman in Liverpool. He was opposed to the activities of the "Bristlers".

The following letters from *Imandt* and *Schily* I would only preface with the remark that, on the outbreak of the revolution, Imandt left university in order to take part as a volunteer in the war in Schleswig-Holstein. In 1849 Schily and Imandt led the storming of the arsenal in Prüm,[11] and from there they forced a passage to the Palatinate with their troops and the weapons they had seized. There they joined the ranks of the army of the Imperial Constitution. Having been expelled from Switzerland in the early summer of 1852 they made their way to London.

"*Dundee*, February 5, 1860

"Dear Marx,

"I am at a loss to understand how Vogt can attempt to connect you with affairs in Geneva. It was common knowledge among the refugees there that of all of us *only Dronke* was in communication with you. The *Brimstone Gang* was before my time and the only name I can recall in connection with it is *Borkheim*.

"The *Bristlers* were the Genevan Workers' Association. The name originated with *Abt*. At the time the Association served as nursery for Willich's secret league of which I was chairman. When, at my instigation, Abt was found by the Workers' Association, to which many refugees belonged, to be a scoundrel and unworthy to associate with refugees and workers, he published a lampoon shortly afterwards in which he accused Schily and myself of the absurdest crimes. Whereupon we revived the whole affair in a different place and before a completely different audience. He rejected our demand that he should come forward with proofs to hack up his libellous allegations, and without its being necessary for Schily or myself to say a word in our own defence, *Dentzel* proposed a motion that Abt be declared an infamous slanderer. The motion was approved unanimously for a second time, on this occasion by a meeting of refugees consisting almost entirely of parliamentarians. I am sorry that my tale is so very meagre, but it is the first time in eight years that I have had cause to think back to all *that trash*. I would not like to be condemned to write about it and *I shall be most astonished if you can bring yourself to immerse your hand in such a brew*.

"*Adieu*, Your *Imandt*"

A well-known Russian writer[12] who had been on very friendly terms with Herr Vogt during his stay in Geneva, wrote to me very much along the lines of the concluding words of the above letter:

"Paris, 10 Mai 1860

"Mon cher Marx!

"J'ai appris avec la plus vive indignation les calomnies qui ont été répandues sur votre compte et dont j'ai eu connaissance par un article de la *Revue contemporaine*, signé *Édouard Simon*[13] Ce qui m'a particulièrement étonné c'est que Vogt, que je ne croyais ni bête, ni méchant, aît pu tomber dans l'abaissement moral que sa brochure révèle. Je n'avais besoin d'aucun témoignage pour être assuré, que vous étiez incapable de basses et sales intrigues, et il m'a été d'autant plus pénible de lire ces diffamations que dans le moment même où on les imprimait, vous donniez au monde savant la première partie du beau travail.[14] qui doit renouveler la science économique et la fonder sur des nouvelles et plus solides bases... Mon cher Marx, ne vous occupez plus de toutes ces misères; tous les hommes sérieux, tous les hommes consciencieux sont pour vous, mais ils attendent de vous autre chose que des polémiques stériles; ils voudraient pouvoir étudier le plus tôt possible la continuation de votre belle œuvre.—Votre succés est immense parmi les hommes pensants et s'il vous peut être agréable d'apprendre le retentissement que vos doctrines trouvent en Russie, je vous dirai qu'au commencement de cette année le professeur—[15] a fait à Moscovie un cours public d'économie politique dont la première leçon n'a pas été autre chose que la paraphrase de votre récente publication[16] Je vous adresse un numéro de *La Gazette du Nord*, où vous verrez combien votre nom est estimé dans mon pays. Adieu, mon cher Marx, conservez-vous en bonne sauté et travaillez comme par le passé, a éclairer le monde, sans vous préoccuper des petites bêtises et des petites lâchetés. Croyez à l'amitié de votre dévoué...".[17]

*Szemere*, the former Hungarian Minister, also wrote to me in similar vein:

"Vaut-il la peine que *vous* vous occupiez de toutes ces bavardises?"[18]

I have briefly indicated in the Preface my reasons for immersing my hand in Vogt's brew (to use Imandt's forceful expression) despite these and similar attempts at dissuasion. To return to our *Bristlers*. The following letter from *Schily* is printed here verbatim, not even omitting the parts that do not refer to "*nos moutons*". I have however shortened the description of the Brimstone Gang since it would merely repeat what we already know from Borkheim's account, and certain other passages have been saved for *later* as I must to some extent treat "my agreeable subject" artistically and not blurt all my secrets out at once.

"Paris, February 8, 1860 46 Rue Lafayette

"Dear Marx,

"It was very agreeable to have a direct sign of life from you in the shape of your letter of January 31[19] and you will find me all the more ready to give you the information you require about these episodes in Geneva as I intended to write to you about them *proprio motu*[20] The first thing that struck me, and not only me but also all my Geneva acquaintances here with whom I had occasion to discuss the matter, was that Vogt, as you write, lumps you together with people who are quite unknown to you. And so, in the interests of the truth, I had taken upon myself the task of conveying to you the relevant information about the 'Bristlers', the 'Brimstone Gang', etc. So you can see that both your questions: '(1) Who were the Bristlers and what were their activities? and (2) What was the Brimstone Gang, who belonged to it, what did they do?' came at a very opportune moment. I must begin by pointing out, however, that you are guilty of an error in chronology, for priority belongs by rights to the *Brimstone Gang*. If it was Vogt's wish 'to have a bit of fun' and terrify the German philistines by conjuring up the devil or even by calling down fire and brimstone on their heads, he should have found rather more diabolical figures for his models than those harmless and jolly ale-house geniuses to whom we, the senior members of the Geneva emigration, used to refer jokingly and without any unfriendly ulterior motive as the Brimstone Gang, a title which they too accepted in good part. They were the merry sons of the Muses who had taken their *examina* and done their *exercitia practica* in the various South German putsches, finishing up in the campaign for the Imperial Constitution. After the failure they were gathering strength in Geneva in the company of their examiners and instructors in revolution for the time when business would be resumed.... It is obvious that anyone who either was never in Geneva or arrived there after the dissolution of the Gang could not have belonged to it. It was a purely local and ephemeral flora (a brimstone flora would be the right name for this corrosive substance), though probably because of the *Rummeltipuff* with its whiffs of revolution, it proved to have too strong a scent for Federal Swiss nerves. For Druey blew and the flower was scattered to the winds. It was not until a considerable period had elapsed that *Abt* came to Geneva, followed a few years later by *Cherval*, and while both of them smelled, 'each in his own way', it was not, as Vogt alleges, in that forgotten bouquet which had long since wilted and been torn apart.

"The activities of the Gang may be more or less summed up in the words: *toiling in the vineyard of the Lord*.)[21] In addition they edited the *Rummeltipuff* with its motto: 'Dwell in the land and thrive on *red wine*!'[22] In it they exercised their wit and humour on everything under the sun: they denounced false prophets, flayed the parliamentarians (*inde irae*[23], and spared neither themselves nor us, their audience, but caricatured everyone whether friend or foe with an admirable conscientiousness and impartiality.

"I do not need to tell you that they had no connection with you and never wore your *Bundschuh*,[24] Nor can I conceal from you the fact that that footwear would have been little to their taste. These soldiers of the revolution were for the time being lounging around in the slippers of the armistice until the revolution itself would reanimate them and re-equip them with its own buskin (the seven-league boots of resolute progress)[25] And anyone who had been so bold as to disturb their siesta with Marxist political economy, workers' dictatorship, etc., would have been given a very cool reception indeed. For Heaven knows, the work *they* did required nothing further than a Master of Ceremonies and their economic researches were confined almost entirely to the 'jug' and its *reddish* contents. One of their members, Backfisch, an honest farrier from the Odenwald, once expressed the opinion that 'the right to work was all very well, but the duty to work was one he would prefer to be spared....'

"Let us then replace the sacrilegiously abused tombstone of the Brimstone Gang. To prevent any further desecration of their grave a Hafiz should be employed to sing the *requiescat in pace*.'[26] But, failing that, may they herewith accept this obituary *pro viatico et epitaphio*:[27]They knew the smell of powder.' Whereas their sacrilegious historiographer has merely managed to smell out brimstone.

"The *Bristlers* first emerged at a time when the Brimstone Gang only lived on verbally in legend, in the records of Genevan philistines and the hearts of Genevan beauties. The brushmakers and bookbinders, Sauernheimer, Kamm, Ranickel, etc., came into conflict with Abt. When Imandt, myself and others resolutely took their side we too became the targets of his hostility. Abt was then summoned to appear before a general assembly of refugees and members of the Workers' Association, combined to form a *cour des pairs*.[28] or a *haute cour de justice*[29] Abt did in fact appear and not only failed to provide proof of the accusations he had hurled at various people, but even declared quite openly that he had made them up quite arbitrarily, as reprisals for just as arbitrary accusations that his enemies had levelled at him: '*Tit for tat, reprisals make the world go round*!'—washis view of the matter. Having made a valiant plea for his system of tit for tat, thoroughly convincing the noble peers of the great practical advantages to be derived from it, and after proofs of the accusations against him had been brought, he was declared to have confessed his malicious slanders, was found guilty of the other misdeeds imputed to him and was formally outlawed. In revenge he christened the noble peers, originally only the above-named guild-members, the '*Bürstenheimers*' [Bristlers], which, as you see, is a happy combination of the trade and name of the first-named. You should revere him, therefore, as the progenitor of the family of Bürstenheim, without however your being in a position to claim to be one of or related to the clan, whether the term is applied to the guild or the peerage. For you ought to know that those of them that did busy themselves with 'organising the revolution' did so not as your supporters but as your opponents. They revered Willich as God the Father or as their Pope and anathematised you as the Antichrist or antipope, so that Dronke, who was regarded as your only supporter and *legatus a latere*[30] in the diocese of Geneva, was excluded from all councils of the Church except the oenological ones, where he was *primus inter pares*. But the Bristlers, like the Brimstone Gang, were the merest Ephemeridae, and Druey had only to give one mighty puff and they scattered in all directions.

"The fact that a pupil of Agassiz[31] should have got involved in these fossils of the Geneva emigration and have unearthed such fantastic tales as those served up in his pamphlet is the more astonishing since as regards the species of Bristleriana he actually possesses a perfect specimen in his own zoological cabinet in the shape of a mastodon of the order of ruminants: **Ranickel**, the very prototype of the Bristler. So the rumination seems to have been imperfectly performed, or else not properly studied by the above-mentioned pupil....

"There you have all you asked for *et au delà*.[32] But now I too should like to ask you something, namely your opinion about the wisdom of introducing an inheritance tax *pro patria, vulgo*: for the state. It would form the state's principal source of income, eliminate the taxes which at present burden the poorer classes and of course would only apply in cases of sizeable estates.... Besides this inheritance tax I am interested in two German institutions: !the consolidation of landed property' and 'mortgage insurance', institutions which I wish were better appreciated in this country. At the present time they are not at all understood, for the French in general, with but few exceptions, when they gaze across the Rhine see nothing but nebulosities and sauerkraut. An exception was provided recently by *L'Univers*[33] which, after lamenting immoderately about the fragmentation of landed property, added quite correctly: 'Il serait désirable qu'on appliquât immédiatement les remèdes énergiques, dont une partie de l'Allemagne s'est servie avec avantage: le remaniement obligatoire des propriétés partout où les 0.7 des propriétaires d'une commune réclament cette mesure. La nouvelle répartition facilitera le drainage, l'irrigation, la culture rationelle et la voirie des propriétés.'[34] On top of this comes *Le Siècle* which is in general somewhat myopic, but which is completely blind when it comes to consider German affairs, thanks to a chauvinism which it displays as proudly as Diogenes showed off his threadbare cloak—it serves up this stuff, disguised as patriotism, daily to its subscribers. This chauvinist, then, having fired off the obligatory salvo at *L'Univers*, its *bête noire*, went on to say: 'Propriétaires ruraux, suivez ce conseil! Empressez-vous de réclamer le remaniement obligatoire des propriétés; *dépouillez les petits au profit des grands*. O fortunatos nimium agricolas—trop heureux habitants des campagnes—sua si bona—s'ils connaissaient l'avantage à remanier obligatoirement la propriété.'[35] As if the large landowners could out-vote the smallholders where *each man* had a vote.

"For the rest I let God's water flow freely over His land, give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's,[36] and even 'the Devil's share',[37] and remain your old affectionate friend,

*Schily*"

It follows from the foregoing that as there existed a "Brimstone Gang" in Geneva in 1849-50, and an association called the "Bristlers" in 1851-52, two societies connected neither with each other nor with myself, the revelations of our parliamentary clown about the existence of the "*Brimstone Gang* **or** *Bristlers*" are flesh of his flesh, a *lie* to the fourth power, "like the father that begets it: gross as a mountain, open, palpable".[38] Just imagine a historian shameless enough to report: At the time of the first French Revolution there was a group of people known by the name of the "*Cercle social*"[39] **or else** by the no less characteristic title of "*Jacobins*".

As regards the life and deeds of the "Brimstone Gang *or* Bristlers" that he concocted, our merry joker was careful to keep the costs of their production down to a minimum. I shall give but a single instance of this:

"One of the chief occupations of the Brimstone Gang," the well-rounded one informs his astounded audience of philistines, "was to compromise people at home in Germany. in such a way that they were forced to pay money and no longer resist the attempts to blackmail them" (a fine how-do-you-do;"[40]they *were forced to no longer* resist the attempts to blackmail them"), "in exchange for which the gang should preserve the secret of their having been compromised. Not just *one* letter, but *hundreds* were written to Germany by these men" (namely Vogt's homunculi) "and all of them contained the naked threat that the person in question would be denounced for complicity in this or that act of revolution unless a certain sum of money had been received at a specified address by a given date" ("Magnum Opus", p. 139).

Why did Vogt fail to print even "*one*" of these letters? Because the "Brimstone Gang" wrote "*hundreds"* of them. If threatening letters were as plentiful as blackberries[41] Vogt would swear that we should have no threatening letter. If he were summoned to appear tomorrow before a court of honour of the Grütli Association[42] to give an account of the "hundreds" of "threatening letters", he would instead of producing a single letter pull a bottle of wine from his jerkin, smack his lips, cock a snook and with a great belly-laugh worthy of Silenus, he would exclaim like his Abt: "Tit for tat, reprisals make the world go round."