---
id: MECW04-043
title: "Hegel's Construction of The Phenomenology (note)"
volume: 4
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "November 1844"
year: 1844
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 4, p. 665; Written: presumably in November 1844; First published: in Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 5, 1932."
status: raw
---

Note from MECW vol. 4, 1975 :

Marx's note entitled "Hegel's Construction of the Phenomenology" is at the beginning of his Notebook for 1844-1847 (the first of his surviving Notebooks).

The basic ideas contained in the four points were developed in The *Holy* Family, in particular in the sections where, criticising the Young Hegelians' tendency to replace the revolutionary transformation of existing reality by abstract theoretical criticism of what exists, Marx showed that this tendency was based on Hegel's idealist conception developed in his *Phänomenologie des Geistes* (see pp. 85-86, 195-97 of this volume).

1) Self-consciousness instead of man. Subject — object.

2) The *differences* of things are unimportant, because substance is conceived as self-distinction or because self-distinction, the distinguishing, the mental activity is regarded as the essential. Within the framework of speculation Hegel therefore makes distinctions that really grasp the vital point. .

3) Abolition of *estrangement* is identified with abolition of *objectivity* (an aspect evolved by Feuerbach in particular).

4) Your *abolition* of the imagined object, of the object as object of consciousness, is identified with the real objective abolition, with sensuous action, practice and real activity as distinct from thinking. (Has still to be developed.)