---
id: MECW43-335
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 16, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "16 May 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 16 MAY 1870[2]

Dear FRED,

Enclosed—a very well-behaved screed from Wilhelm![3] The old fool is beginning to take fright. In my last letter,[4] I told him that Borkheim was very sick; the Dr had forbidden him to do literary work for a long time even *after* his recovery; the continuation of Bakunin's twaddle,[5] which should never have been started, must now be stopped, etc.!

And what does the brute do? In the issue of *Volksstaat* that arrived today he published a personally defamatory article against Borkheim, written by the vagabond Nechayev.[6] I am really afraid this will excite Borkheim in a dangerous manner. Borkheim wrote to me the day before yesterday; he wanted to see me. I could not go because of my very foul cold and cough. But my wife was there yesterday. He is still very weak, and all excitement has specifically been prohibited by the Dr! The arrival of *Volksstaat* today will have caused an awful scene!

I wrote immediately to Wilhelm, the silly blockhead, and fittingly hauled him over the coals. At the same time, I mentioned that his effusions about you were 'too childish' to be answered, but he could rely upon it that his (Wilhelm's) 'private views about Hegel or ANYTHING ELSE' were a matter of indifference to you,[7] ditto the circumstance 'which' and 'what assortment of studies' he (Wilhelm) 'rather despises'. The fellow's claim that he has led 'for 22 years a restless life, with no time for any leisure' is delicious. We know he spent ABOUT 15 years of the 22 in idleness.

I am sending you the *Echo,* which you must preserve, because of the disavowal of the *FRENCH BRANCH*[8] also published in the *Marseillaise, Internationale* (Brussels), and our other organs. Circumstances were finally so favourable that we had an opportunity to give an official kick to the rabble.

*Mayence! soit!*[9]

It is *un peu indiscret*[10] for Bracke to have had extracts from your private letter to him[11] published in *Volksstaat.* But the intention is good, and I even believe this operation was politically correct. They obviously wished thereby to take a kick at Schweitzer.

There has already been a lot in *The Irishman* about the scurvy IRISH Laws COMMISSION.[12] I shall try to find out the necessary about it.

If my condition *doesn't quickly* change so that it no longer disturbs my work, I might come for 8-14 days to Manchester.[13] If nothing else helps, perhaps a change of air will.

Your

K. M.