---
id: MECW43-261
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 12, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "12 November 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 12 November 1869

DEAR FRED,

This week something suspicious has displayed itself in my left arm-pit (as in Manchester)[1], and on my leg. Arsenic again immediately. Additionally, Tussy forces me to take long walks with her after 1 or 2 o'clock every day. Finally, today introduced surreptitiously *for the first time* a flannel vest, since a cold in this state is not pleasant.

You are surprised by the pluck of the French, and speak SOMEWHAT SNEERINGLY of us upright Germans. What risks we take you will see from the enclosed extravaganza.

In Stuttgart, in accordance with his habit, Freiligrath once again had himself photographed in several dozen poses, decked out as a statue, etc. The most successful holy picture of this Classen-Kappelmann-hero[2] is—*verbotenus*[3] —a scene in which he *as a lion* rides on a *camel.* This is probably a back-hander for Heine's camel who defeats the lion.[4]

Liebknecht will be taking off next week for 3 months in prison, and has sent Borkheim a desperate plea for money.

What scares me about the French is the terrible confusion in their heads. Ledru-Rollin's circular letter is quite that of a pretender.[5] He really appears to take *au sérieux*[6] the dictatorship over France offered him by Heinzen. On the other hand, *Zukunft* has been good enough to offer Mr Acollas, whom nobody in Paris knows, a post in the provisional government, because he had called the French to accept Dr J. Jacoby's programme instead of the antiquated human and *citoyen*[7] rights of 1793. One good turn deserves another. I find that OLD Jacoby himself is not playing properly the role he dictated for himself. Grasping the opportunity of the Hanoverian event,[8] should he not call on the Prussian sergeant-major-government—since Prussia is, after all, a 'military state'—also to lay aside those useless and, at the same time, expensive decorations, such as chambers, civil courts and the like? Wrapping oneself up silently in the depths of one's own moral indignation does not lure a soul from his hearth.

A while ago, the Russian gentlemen bombarded an island near Korea just for amusement, as Borkheim discovered in a Moscow newspaper.[9] Not a word about it in the English papers. If things go on like this, these fine fellows will soon be in possession of Japan.

The latest MEETINGS in Ireland were very nice; the clerics were seized by their collars and removed from the speaker's stand. Instead of the programme on Ireland,[10] for which there is no proper motive, I have had (in order to adopt resolutions) the following placed on the agenda for next Tuesday.[11][12]

1. Proceedings of the English ministry on the Irish amnesty question!

2. The attitude of the English working class to the Irish question.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.