---
id: MECW43-003
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, April 10, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 April 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwech- sel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 10 April 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed letters from Wilhelmchen^7 and Siebel, please return the former to me. Poor Siebel seems to be having a bad time indeed. I shall see him in about 10 days.

Further, the draft of an advertisement for Meissner^8; what do you think of it? So far it has not been pressing, since he could not advertise because of the Easter Fair anyway.

Yesterday I sent you Nos. 4 to 14 of Wilhelmchen's rag.[1] It is dreadfully stupid. One who was in England for such a long time and who has your book and mine[2] should really know how to put the material supplied to him by the workers to other use than simply reproducing it at full length. Some anti-federalist passages with us in mind are rather comical in connection with the whole federalist-Struveist nature of the sheet.[3]

When I got back here 2 I found such a pile of work waiting that I could only see Gumpert yesterday. Enclosed the prescription: on the first 4-5 days you should take it only twice daily, then 3 times, always 1 1/2-2 hours after a meal. And also live well and get plenty of exercise. Gumpert laughs at your assertion that arsenic makes you stupid.

The vote on parliamentary freedom of speech is explained by the fact that Bismarck had stated previously that for Prussia, for the sake of peace, he would concede this point. So it was not even, as we thought, proof of the courage of the philistines.

What Wilhelm says about the American treaty is of course nonsense from beginning to end.^10

Unfortunately, I have a death to announce to Tussy. The poor hedgehog ate a round hole in his blanket, put his head through it, and got so stuck in it that he was found strangled yesterday morning. Peace to his ashes, and BETTER LUCK TO THE NEXT ONE.

During the 3 days of my absence, the fellows in Liverpool swindled cotton up by no less than 3d., from lOd. to 13d. Hence so much work. Luckily the holidays intervene, which I am using to complete the extracts for the Beesly article.[4] I am starting right away, and thus close for today. Best greetings to your wife and the girls.

Your

F. E.

The wedding was celebrated here with great festivity: the dogs had green collars, a TEA PARTY for 6 children, Lafargue's glass basin served as a punch-bowl, and the poor hedgehog was made drunk for the last time.