---
id: MECW43-120
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 30, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "30 November 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 30 November 1868

DEAR FRED,

I am quite KNOCKED DOWN by your too great kindness. I had my wife show me all the BILLS, and the amount of the debts is much greater than I thought, £210 (of which ABOUT £75 for the pawnshop and interest). This does not include the doctor's BILL for attendance during the SCARLATINA, which he has not yet submitted.

During the past few years we have used more than £350, but the sum is absolutely sufficient, since 1. during the past few years Lafargue was living with us, and expenses were much increased by his presence in the house; and 2., owing to the debt system, everything cost much too much. With a complete CLEARANCE of the debts, I would be able for the first time to enforce a STRICT ADMINISTRATION.

You can imagine how unpleasant conditions have been here at home over the past few months from the fact that Jennychen—behind my back—got an engagement for herself as *private governess* with an English family. The business is not due to begin until January 1869. I gave permission, after the event, on the proviso (the lady of the house, her husband is Dr Monroe, visited my wife in this connection) that the engagement should *only be binding for 1 month,* and both sides, after the month had passed, would have the *right to cancel* Though the matter was extremely embarrassing to me (the child would have to teach small children almost all day long)—I do not need to emphasise this—I consented on this condition, since I found it favourable that Jennychen would be diverted by some sort of occupation and, in particular, get outside these 4 walls. For years now my wife has quite lost her TEMPER—understandable under the circumstances, but not thereby made pleasanter—and tortures the children mortally with her complaints and irritability and BAD HUMOUR, though no children could bear it all IN A MORE JOLLY WAY. But *sunt certi denique fines*?[1] It is naturally UNPLEASANT to write to you about this. It is easier to speak of such things. But it is necessary in order to explain to you why I did not absolutely reverse Jennychen's step.

Your

K. M.