---
id: MECW43-124
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, December 8, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "8 December 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 8 December 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed five pounds and the letters from Lugau[1] and Schweitzer[2] returned. That things would come to this pass with Schweitzer was fairly clear to me from previous practical experience. This honourable gentleman was not inclined to hand over his 'strict' organisation, headed by the nominal king of the tailors; for him the only question was whether good old Wilhelm[3] would subordinate himself to him or not. I don't exactly mind his assessing Wilhelm correctly, but he forgets that he himself, with much more brain, is, in his LINE, just such a twopenny-halfpenny character as Wilhelm. His confidence that he can regularly be given ticket of leave from the *cachot*[4] also has an unpleasant ring; he should not have written this to *you* after using this method so often, and precisely during his Bismarck era, with such success.

The Lugau lads' letter does them great honour. That jackass Liebknecht has described the conditions of these workers in his sheet[5] in more than 20 articles, *yet only here* does one see clearly where the infamy lies. Incidentally, Moore says that similar conditions—though not so bureaucratically intricate ones:—obtain in English coalmines.

The letter from Serno-Solovyevich[6] was *not* enclosed. In haste.

Your

F. E.

Today in the office I was overrun, without a break, from twelve-thirty until five.