---
id: MECW43-201
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 14, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 May 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Marx"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 14 May 1869

DEAR FRED,

My wife will come back only sometime next week, so I cannot be in Manchester AT THE OPPORTUNE TIME.

Eichhoff left yesterday. His proposal — *quant à*[1] the *Peasant War*—is that his brother should publish the stuff and that he pay out the balance ON BEHALF of the 'International' at the next Book Fair, after subtracting his commission and costs.[2] He says: as far as his brother is concerned, you may regard the proposal as *definitive.*

With regard to *Herr Vogt:* When Liebknecht was arrested in Berlin, he left everything in confusion and, ditto, he did not clear up at the time of his EXPULSION. So 'he cannot remember' what happened to *Vogt.* Eichhoff finally discovered that a second-hand bookseller had been advertising the book for 2 years in his sales catalogue. He visited the fellow, named Kampfmeyer. He had sold them all, and 'ditto cannot remember' *how* the books came into his hands. So everything Liebknecht told *us* was—fiction, to put it mildly.

The press here is lousy. First, they have suppressed like *one* man every word of our *Belgian* MISSIVE)[3] (after deliberately publishing last week some stupid lines in the sense of Cherval, probably written by the **police member** of the Brussels special committee); and not only that, they have ditto like *one* man suppressed our Address to the AMERICAN LABOR UNION[4] (written by me, approved last Tuesday[5], although this is *against* war between the UNITED STATES and England.[6] But there are things in it that these blackguards do not like.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.