---
id: MECW43-179
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 5, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "5 April 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 5 April 1869

DEAR FRED,

I can't make anything of your *snieunt* (I can't read the following letters) *jown*[1] According to the etymology, I can only explain *lucus a non lucendo*[2] that in Danish *snoe* means turn, and *jeon* means EVEN.

I congratulate you on the energy with which you have cut the umbilical cord with Dover Street.[3]

Laura is quite well again. Jenny will be coming home tomorrow or the day after 'for business reasons'. Tussy will stay in Paris for at least 2 months. As you will note from the enclosed letter, she is absolutely delighted with Fouschtra,[4] the YOUNGSTER of the Lafargue FAMILY.

The Wilhelm-Bebel-Schweitzer clash of words has not really been so bad; after all, when of 11,000 voters, 4,500 abstained from voting *for* Schweitzer, this was not exactly a triumph for this gentleman.[5]

With regard to the *Citizen*, the contributors to which include Dr Engel of Berlin and Dr Brentano of the same, this appears to be stillborn or, as OLD Werner says, 'laid out'. Lloyd Jones is an old tailor by trade, who figured in a STRIKE back in 1824. For a long time now he has been an apostle of cooperation, and a lazy-bones. Odger and Applegarth are both possessed by a mania for mediation and a longing for respectability. On the CENTRAL COUNCIL, we ticked off Mr Applegarth properly.[6] With regard to Odger's *collaboration* in particular, it never went further than the prospectus, and here people simply laugh at such PROMISSORY BILLS on his part.

In 2 issues the Bonapartist *Peuple* (directly edited *with* Boustrapa)[7] denounces our International because of the recent exercises of terrorism in Geneva)[8] (on the occasion of the typographers' STRIKE[9], and, at the same time, makes mocking remarks about our impotence. It would naturally be very good to keep the volcanic explosion on such a small but conspicuous stage, *if the means were available.* But to drag in the International so directly, as Becker[10] and Co. are doing, without preparation, without thinking about a war-chest, without taking into consideration the good or bad state of business in Europe—this is simply compromising. I shall send you the relevant numbers of *Peuple* after I have presented them to the COUNCIL tomorrow.

Oberwinder has sent me the prospectus of his paper[11] for subscription. It appears twice a month, and costs 45 kreuzer per quarter. If I send the list back with subscriptions, 1 copy for you, 1 copy for Moore, 1 for Borkheim and 1 for me, we shall have to send the total sum of 3 gulden. You can't send the money individually, I mean for one COPY.

Enclosed *Lanterne* and *Cloche* and *Werker.* Do send me copies of *Zukunft,* so that I can see something about the Reichstag.

And also, if possible, Manchester papers containing arguments about the price of cotton. The Liberal M.P. from Manchester[12] is supposed to be agitating or spreading agitation amongst the workers in Stockport so that they should demand, directly from the GOVERNMENT, *cotton production* in India, that is, PROTECTION IN ANOTHER FORM.

COMPLIMENTS to MRS Lizzie ON RESTORATION OF HEALTH. *Salut.*

Your

Moor

I hope your eye inflammation has passed.