---
id: MECW43-309
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 26, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 March 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III., Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in M"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 26 March 1870

Dear Fred,

Returned, enclosed, the letter from the 'wrong' Moll.[1] I have heard nothing from Menke yet. When you write to the lads, please tell them, also, 1. that Lessner has written repeatedly to them that the *Central Council[2] * can do nothing on this matter; 2. that they can work it out on their own 5 fingers that their cooperative society is of absolutely no interest to the English; and 3. that the Central Council is bombarded from all parts of Europe with demands for money, without receiving financial contributions from anybody on the continent.

I don't understand your lines of this morning. This is probably due to the fact that my head, as a result of physical infirmity, is not at its most lucid.

I would appreciate it if you could send me, tomorrow evening (if there is a post on Sunday, which is not the case here), £5 as an advance on the coming quarter. My wife informed me too late, i.e. at a moment of exhausted exchequer, that the gas bill has to be paid at 2 o'clock on Monday.

I think I left behind in Manchester the number of the *Queen's Messenger* containing the biography of Clanricarde. Since this brute is putting on great airs in connection with the Irish coercion bill,[3] it is high time for J. Williams to introduce to the French a counterpart for Pierre Bonaparte.

Have you ever seen such filthy weather as this winter and autumn? No wonder that one can't get back on one's feet.

*Salut*

Your

K. M.