---
id: MECW43-063
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 29, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "29 August 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 29 August 1868

DEAR FRED,

The £20 received with BEST THANKS. Tussy had a great shock today. She found Dicky dead in his cage although he was still singing merrily yesterday. He has been buried with full honours.

Dupont has received the mandate from Naples to represent the Neapolitan branch.[1] Since the Mentana business, as we see from Italian reports, there has been a general reactionary trend in domestic affairs, and in particular the workers' right to meet and form societies has almost been done away with.^1

In Paris, happily, we still have our old people, *behind bars.* The committee there will send a *délégué* to Brussels, but against that the various *corps de métier*[2] will send 8-9.[3] Our people have written to us from prison suggesting that these *corps de métier* MEN should be 'compromised politically' so that there should be no way back for them. Just to show the sort of methods to which the Paris police have recourse: A gentleman calling himself
'Eugène Dupont' from London visited the wives of several of the prisoners to pump them. He was a police agent, but his play-acting did not work anywhere.

Eccarius left for Nuremberg as our *délégué* today.[4] From there he will go to Brussels. He is correspondent of *The Times* in both cases.[5]

The so-called *branche française,*[6] under the leadership of Messrs Pyat and Vésinier, is sending a delegate to Brussels in order— *horribile dictu*[7] — to put us in the dock!

Apropos. If Moore is still there, tell him it would be good if he could pay to me his USUAL CONTRIBUTION to the INTERNATIONAL WORKINGMEN'S ASSOCIATION by Tuesday.[8] We are weakly represented in Brussels, and every shilling that we can raise now will be used to send one MEMBER MORE there. TUESDAY NEXT IS OUR LAST SITTING this year before the congress.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.