---
id: MECW43-163
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 3, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "3 March 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 3 March 1869

Dear Moor,

You see how right I was to dissuade you from taking a trip to Paris under any circumstances. It would be madness to put oneself in the hands of those scoundrels, particularly since nobody[1] enquires about you and the *lois de sûreté*[2] are still in force. Let Lafargue go to Strasbourg as soon as possible and take his examinations; once that is over, he will be able to take some liberties. The fact that he has emancipated himself from Moilin is of enormous value; this Jesuit would certainly have got him into trouble. What Lafargue writes about Blanqui is very nice.[3]

Moore tells me that Beesly has written an article on the social question in the new *Fortnightly* which reaches the maximum confusion.[4]

The only thing linguistically new for me in the old Scottish passage[5] was the *participium praesentis* havand, having,—showing that this form still existed in Scotland at the beginning of the 16th[6] century, when it had long disappeared in England.

I really did make the blunder in Russian. I have pretty well forgotten the Russian declensions.[7]

The Lugau material[8] will be returned today by BOOK POST. Since I no longer know which passages I quoted, I cannot indicate them for you; however, I made a sort of index to the pamphlets, which is attached, and you may be able to see from this where the passages might be.

What is the pamphlet against the LIFE ASSURANCE Co., called?[9] We really must get hold of it.

So Wilhelmchen appealed to you against Schweitzer.[10] This will make a fine story, since Schweitzer cannot be caught so easily. The row is going to be fun; don't you get the *Social-Demokrat* any more? Just now, Eichhoff should keep us properly *au courant.*[11] In the next few days I shall send you some articles that he (certainly nobody else) wrote in the *Zukunft*.[12] In the meantime, in Essen the Social-Democrat Hasenclever, also supported by Liebknecht, has been elected with a majority of 960 votes over what the *Landrat*[13] and the National-Liberal candidate *received together,* and in Hanover (I believe Celle) there are also prospects for getting someone in.[14]

Incidentally, Wilhelm appears to be bestirring himself more and to be having some success in Saxony. If the jackass would only abandon his stupid South-German-federalist and his Guelphic concerns, he could accomplish something despite his thick-headedness, in view of the mistrust of Schweitzer that rules amongst the leaders of the Lassalleans; for Schweitzer's bad conscience disarms him too, when things come to a climax. But with his People's Party[15] and his mania for restoring thrones, he'll have no success in dangling carrots before north German workers.

The odd thing is that he suddenly wants to go to Berlin, that is to say, admits that he *can,* without danger.

Incidentally, I cannot see how you, as the GENERAL COUNCIL, could declare yourselves competent on this question—even if both parties agreed—unless they both also declared themselves willing to subject themselves to the arbitration verdict against the organisation and management of the TRADES UNIONS, etc.

Your

F. E.