---
id: MECW43-093
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, October 15, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "15 October 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1919 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

London, 15 October 1868

Tomorrow or the day after tomorrow the Lafargue FAMILY is leaving for Paris. This will greatly reduce our HOUSEHOLD EXPENSES.

I have written to A. Frank et Co. in Paris. Since I know that he has sold COPIES OF MY *Anti-Proudhon*[2] as recently as *in the past few weeks,* I asked in my letter for accounts of the whole affair, REMINDING MR Frank that he and Vogler were only my *agents de vente*[3] and that I had paid all the printing costs. Thereupon I received, a few days ago, the following reply:

'J'ai l'honneur, Monsieur, de vous informer que j'ai racheté la Maison A. Frank le 21 Oct. 1865, *sans* actifs et passifs.— Il y avait à cette époque 92 exemplaires de votre brochure *Misère de la philosophie* en magasin que je tiens à votre disposition.— Quant à ce qui pourrait vous revenir de solde, il faudra vous adresser soit à.M r Vogler soit au curateur de la succession de mon prédécesseur, M r Bassot, 58 rue de Bondy, Paris, etc. per *F. Vieweg,* propriétaire actuel de la maison A. Frank.'[4]

I shall now grant Lafargue power of attorney to collect the 92 *exemplaires,* which he will sell amongst his friends. For the remainder (there were 1,500 *exemplaires),* I am granting Schily power of attorney to start legal proceedings. I do not know Vogler's whereabouts, but his former *associé* Shee still has a *librairie*[5] in Brussels, where I can mobilise a handful of young lawyers belonging to our Association. It would be nice if I could still squeeze out some cash.

Attached packet of the *Social-Demokrat,* upon which you should please write me a few marginal notes (regarding the TRADES UNIONS stories) since I did not have the time to read the stuff. The letter to Schweitzer has gone off.[6] Enclosed also the latest number of *Lanterne* and a pamphlet about Plon-Plon, said to be written by Charras.[7]

Apropos. I had a meeting with Beesly. The SUB-EDITOR of Morley (the EDITOR for the SCIENTIFIC DEPARTMENT) declared that the argument was irrefutable. However, the article was too 'DRY' for A MAGAZINE. Beesly asked me to put it in a more popular form, without sacrificing the SCIENTIFIC POINTS. This is RATHER DIFFICULT. However, I'll try. In particular, he wants a longer introduction, including personalia about MY PAST and the book's impact in Germany. This, OF COURSE, you must write. But there is time for this until I send you the BULK of the article. The whole shit is then to go into *The Westminster Review. Salut*

Your

K. M.

Have you read *A. Slade: 'Turkey and the Crimean War'?* It appears that 'Bosh' is a Turkish word, since Slade says: 'bosh lakerdeh' (empty words).[8]