---
id: MECW43-148
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, January 28, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 January 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 29 January 1869

Dear Moor,

I at last have a chance to write to you at greater length. Herr, etc. Gimborn[1] has not presented himself. According to your description, the fellow obviously wants nothing but to indulge in spying industrially.

The Bakunin group of both male and female sex (which difference Bakunin also wants to abolish, i.e., that of the sexes) has probably quietly passed away. The business was of Russian cunning, but still started stupidly; the fox tail showed too clearly and workers, in particular, cannot be caught in this way. Old Becker[2] simply cannot keep his fingers off 'organising', and was just the man to walk into the trap. I am quite ready to believe that he commits other idiocies, but I wish we had a better source than Wilhelm,[3] who simply cannot see FACTS as they really are. Apropos, Wilhelm has not sent me his sheet[4] any more since New Year; if he thinks I'm going to pay for it, he is making a big mistake. I am really glad not to be instructed every week that we may not make a revolution until the Federal Diet, the blind Guelph[5] and the honorable Elector of Hesse[6] are restored, and terrible and legitimate revenge wreaked upon Bismarck the godless.

The Basle story is very nice.[7] Altogether things are marching ahead well in Switzerland. Of course, the affair is significant only because everything which is more or less suppressed on the rest of the Continent appears there in the light of day. But that is in itself very good. And direct legislation by the people makes sense there, because the direct or indirect domination of the bourgeoisie should be countered on the legislative councils.[8] Since the Swiss workers virtually did not exist as a political party of their own until the Geneva STRIKE,[9] but were simply the tail of the radical bourgeoisie, they elected only radical bourgeois to the councils. On the other hand, the elected peasants could also be managed easily by the educated bourgeois. For small cantons, this may be quite satisfactory, but it naturally immediately becomes superfluous and a hindrance as soon as the proletariat enters the movement en masse and begins to dominate it.

A nice feature of the Basle strike is the contributions from Austria as far as Temesvâr. It is inexcusable how old Becker has squandered this business with his wild declarations.[10]

Have only glanced at the Vogt pamphlet,[11] seen that he has the horse descended from the flea. If this is so, from whom is the jackass who wrote this pamphlet descended?

Today I am sending you back the copies of *Social-Demokrat,* etc., together with some copies of *Zukunft.* It is very good that there are still 50 copies of *Herr Vogt* with Kugelmann. When Vogt lectures again in Berlin, Kugelmann must send some there, and *advertise it in the newspapers.* I bet that will drive him away.

Sam Moore is now busily studying the first part of your Duncker,[12] and he understands it quite well. He has completely grasped the dialectical stuff on money theory, etc., and declares it the best thing in the whole book, THEORETICALLY SPEAKING.

The business with good old Gottfried^1 is dragging on and on.[13]

If I can manage it somehow, I shall come to London next Thursday[14] evening and stay until Sunday evening.

The photograph gave great pleasure.;[15] Gumpert has the Büchner[16] I shall pick it up in the next few days; I fight shy of his wife, who is becoming increasingly philistine.

You must give it to the Lassalleans that they understand agitation in quite a different way from our good old Wilhelm and his boors of the People's Party.[17] This is very disagreeable, since they appear to outflank Wilhelm and Bebel completely, and the masses are so enormously stupid, and the leaders a bunch of blackguards.

Tomorrow Jones will be buried with an enormous procession in the same churchyard where Lupus lies. It is a real pity about the man. After all, his bourgeois phrases were simply hypocrisy, and here in Manchester there is nobody who can replace him with the workers. The people here will break up completely and trail more than ever behind the bourgeoisie. Furthermore, amongst the politicians, he was the only *educated* Englishman who was, *au fond,*[18] completely on our side.

Apropos Beesly: How are things regarding the article for the *Westminster?*[19] Strike while the iron is hot.

I still have something of a cold. With weather like this, there is no end to it. I hope you are better now, too.

Best greetings to your wife and the girls. How is MRS LAFARGUE AND BABY?[20]

Your

F. E.

That the Russian[21] from the start announces 'Marx, K., *Works,* Volume I',[22] is also good.