---
id: MECW43-056
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, August 12, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 August 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 12 August 1868

Dear Moor,

It would be worth the trouble to find out more about Mr Morley's motives,[2] even if this only leads to the conclusion that the petty, lousy cliquishness, which we used to assume only existed in Germany, also flourishes here. If Morley refuses the piece^9 despite Beesly's influence, then he has his *reasons.* These men are, *au fond*[3] *bourgeois,* and Mr Morley has all the reasons in the world to prevent giving publicity to things like those you have presented in your analysis. These are no *isms;* THAT KNOCKS HIM ON THE HEAD, and hence the lack of space. Still, I have no fear that we shall therefore be unable to present the book^c to the English public, but the easiest and simplest way is cut off, and we shall have to search until we find a new one. In the meantime, the French articles will produce their effect,^6 and it would be a good thing if they could be shown to the gentlemen of the *Fortnightly;* it would be very nice if Mr Morley could still be forced to accept the piece.

The day after tomorrow I shall probably go for 10 days to Bridlington Quay (address: Mr *Burns,* 3 Burlington Place, Bridlington Quay, Yorkshire), since Charles^d is recovering; but, of course, something may still crop up, in which case I shall write to you. I was there with Moore from Friday till Monday;[4] we made quite interesting geological studies.

Best greetings from Lizzie.

Your

F. E.