---
id: MECW43-229
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 24, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 July 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published considerably abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original "
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 24 JULY 1869

DEAR FRED,

I can only write you a few lines today. The thing is in full suppuration, so very painful, but will also soon be over. The swilling of arsenic will have to begin again.

This morning I received the enclosed screed from Liebknecht.[1]

Which is the more extraordinary, the stupid impudence or the impudent stupidity? This honest fellow regards *official lies,* such as that about non-existent resolutions of the General Council, as permissible in his own mouth, but as highly reprehensible in Schweitzer's. And why did *he* achieve a *reconciliation* with Schweitzer the Monster in Lausanne? And his theory of action! This consists of giving Mr Wilhelm the right to make 'arbitrary' use of my name and that of the General Council wherever he considers appropriate. And the courage of this honest fellow! He claims to be against Lassalle, and so takes the part of the 'true' Lassalleans against the 'false' Lassalleans! Bracke, his man, after all accuses Schweitzer of declaring Lassalle's theory of state credit to be simply an agitational tool, and of not believing in panacea. He had involved me in 'battles'! In 'scandals', I wrote to him.[2]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

I regret that I did not know the book *Die Werkzeuge und Waffen, ihre Entstehung und Ausbildung,* *von Dr Gustav Klemm,* 1858, before the publication of my first volume.[3] What I indicated in the section 'Labour Process' and later 'Division of Labour'[4] is here proved with abundant material.