---
id: MECW43-327
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, May 1, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "1 May 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 1 May 1870

Dear Moor,

POOR Schapper! The toll amongst our old comrades is getting very high.[1] Weerth, Weydemeyer, Lupus, Schapper—but, all the same, à *la guerre comme à la guerre.*[2] Couldn't you get me a photograph of him? Or, if possible, two, you know the Solingen people also want one.

Thanks for the papers. Everything requested goes back tomorrow. I would have sent *Egalité* and *Solidarité* long ago, but I thought the GENERAL COUNCIL would have received *several* copies. In the Spanish things, which certainly still betray a rather Spanish standpoint, you can see how Bakunin's phraseology shines through.

I saw Gumpert yesterday. When he asked after you, and I told him your liver complaints were flaring up again, he blew up without waiting for anything further: *Why doesn't he go to Karlsbad?* There you have the answer. He thinks it would be best early in the summer, or only towards autumn, since it is very full there in July-August, and horribly hot. The Crown Prince of Prussia is there at the moment, wouldn't you like to keep him company? He is an 'edicated'[3] man.

The resolution on *Bee-Hive* will please Sam Moore greatly; he has taken *Bee-Hive* up to now, and been very annoyed at the lousy sheet. I shall tell him he should take *Reynolds's,* or do you know something better? Does the *Democratic News* still exist?

Enclosed, the latest from Wilhelm.[4] He very much favours Prussia being the *only serious* opponent of the revolution in Germany, but is very much against it being a *serious* opponent.

*Pauvre hère!*[5]

Lizzie, for whom I immediately made a quick translation of the 3 Williams, is absolutely enthusiastic about them, and thanks MR Williams warmly.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

For some time now your letters have been arriving in an unobjectionable condition. At least they have become more careful.

Steps have presumably been taken for a decent obituary on Schapper in the press? I don't know whether Eccarius is the man to do justice to this best type of old conspirator.