---
id: MECW43-227
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 21, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "21 July 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 21 July 1869

Dear Moor,

The whole family including Tussy, has gone to see the PRINCE OF WALES[1] drive past. Congratulations to them in such heat.

How dare Wilhelm assure Schweitzer publicly that 'the General Council of the IWA' takes exactly the same attitude to the said Schweitzer as he, Wilhelm does?[2] This is rather much, particularly if, as I assume, he did so without your permission.

That Schweitzer has lost a lot of support among the masses is shown by the fact that he has not dared to proclaim the voting figures.^0 96 Incidentally, he remains—as a DEBATER—superior to all his opponents. The joke about the 'red' republic was very good, and his exploitation of Wilhelm's 'People's Party', ditto.

Wilhelm is betraying the workers to the bourgeois democrats; Wilhelm is taking care not to answer both points, and altogether he appears even more incapable than usual in this polemic. How absurd, for instance, *just at the moment,* to reprint from Schwabenmayer's[3] *Demokratische Correspondenz* the glorification of the *bourgeois* American Republic because of the Pacific Railway.[4]

And how can Wilhelm announce to Schweitzer that he will be shown the door at the Basle Congress?[5]

Monsieur Bonaparte appears to have gone right out of his mind. One cropper after another. First his message with its apparent concessions, then the sudden adjournment, now this droll ministry.[6] If he had set out to show even the stupidest Frenchman that he wants to expose France to worldwide derision, he couldn't have done it better. This is just the way to shake the confidence his majority, his ministers and prefects, his judges and officers have in him. And since all the loyalty has been purchased and was conditional on his future success, they will desert him much earlier than the Senate and *Corps législatif* deserted the old Napoleon in 1814 and 1815.[7] Really not much is needed to lose respect for Mr Louis.

What has happened to the *18th Brumaire}*[8] I see and hear nothing of it. Apropos! You must send me a copy for Charles,[9] whom I relieved of his copy (old edition) on this pledge.

What state are your travel plans in? Jenny writes that she will be returning on Saturday, and then a decision will, I suppose, soon be taken as to when you will go. Here the balancing of accounts is dragging on. Yesterday they said at least 14 days, which I translate as: at least 3 weeks. I'm afraid I'll be stuck here until about 20 August.

I shall cut to length and send to Kugelmann for the *Zukunft,* for its feuilleton, the biography[10] he returned to me. If you want to see it first, let me know.

I close because of the heat; with best greetings.

Your

F. E.