---
id: MECW43-185
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, April 14, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "14 April 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 14 April 1869

Dear Moor,

Enclosed the Solingen letter[1] returned, which is also significant because it clarifies Liebknecht's boasts about the 'establishment of associations in Solingen and Bourscheid'. The one in Solingen was already there,[2] and the Solingen people established the one in Bourscheid.

The article on the Cretan insurrection[3] in *The Diplomatic Review* is the best thing they have published for a long time; ditto Urquhart's letter to Fuad Pasha.[4] But, as always, the source is not given for Brunnow's statement in the Greek dispatch,[5] i.e., 'The "Eastern Question" Closed. Summary from the Blue-Books', *The Diplomatic Review,*[6] whether this dispatch is published in one of the official publications, which is not easy to believe (unless a Greek book), or whether it found its way into Urquhart's hands along private channels. It would be interesting to know this, in case it is quoted later. The statement coincides completely with my constant claim that Russia will not unleash a war before 2 railways are completed to the Black Sea and the Pruth. They are now building like mad, and borrowing money like crazy—in the past 3 years—about £47,000,000! A major part of this represents the future costs of war.

However, in the light of these negotiations, Beust appears to be the Austrian Palmerston, and here too there could be a motive that would favour a speed-up of the action.

Doesn't Eichhoff still send you the *Social-Demokrat?* It would be very important to see how Schweitzer is conducting himself at the moment in his own paper.

You will have read the article about Lassalle in the *Fortnightly,*;[7] and will have seen that you are regarded therein as the real papa of Lassallean and other socialism. Who is this Ludlow? If he could be prevailed upon to write an article in the *Fortnightly* about your book,[8] this would be better than nothing after all.— Congreve's reply to Huxley is the DULLEST, most stupid and most confused thing I have ever seen[9] if this is the supreme wisdom of the Comtists, they can let themselves be buried without further ado.

I still must not strain my eye too much, and I feel it a little again today, since I read too much by lamplight yesterday evening; so I am closing. On Saturday[10] we received a very jolly letter from Tussy.

Best greetings to your wife and Jenny.

Your

F. E.