---
id: MECW43-273
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, December 13, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 December 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 13 December 1869

Dear Moor,

Enclosed—what I have discovered from Davies[1] and otherwise about Irish land ownership ABOUT 1600. The post will be closing immediately, so I must keep things short today.

About the Solingen people—ALL RIGHT. From the start it was my opinion that *both of us* had a special interest in the people.[2] I shall probably go to Barmen next week, as my mother simply insists I spend a Christmas at home again, and this time it is very possible that I shall travel to Solingen and see the people myself.

Correction of incorrect reports would naturally be of no help.[3] It would have to be done every week.

I have the Curran[4] here, in an edition that is probably much more complete, but I suppose I shall be glad also to acquire the new edition. For the time being I have enough to do with the early history up to 1660, and as soon as I'm finished with that, the period 1782-1800 will naturally be my main interest. First of all, however, I want to finish off the old stuff, particularly since I have found that the original positions between 1172-1600 are everywhere represented completely falsely, and I am only slowly discovering the original sources.

Not heard anything about Prendergast yet?.[5] This book will soon be indispensable to me, or its lack will become very *gênant*[6]

More tomorrow.

Your

F. E.