---
id: MECW43-103
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, November 4, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 November 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 4 November 1868

Dear Moor,

You must excuse me if I do not write much now. For some time I have had nasty rheumatism not only in my right arm, but also in the 3 first fingers of my right hand; as a result, after a certain time writing becomes very burdensome for me, and in the evening almost impossible. I hope the trouble disappears; I use alcohol against it—externally that is.

If the Spaniards even now do not know where they stand, following Wilhelmchen's address, they are beyond hope. Unity between bourgeois and worker—the bourgeois *must,* however, realise that he has to concede this and that to the worker—anything to avoid a June battle, for this is followed by 2 December. It is really the crowning point of all confusion. If now the bourgeois will not 'understand', the worker will have to realise that *he* will have to make concessions to the bourgeois. This is the sole possible sense which the thing can have. Hence, the ridiculousness of measuring Spanish conditions, with the enormous beggar-proletariat, both clerical and lay, against the yardstick of conditions in *Saxony.* There is naturally not a single mention of the peasants. Many greetings.

Your

F. E.

Moore tells me that nearly all factory workers in Vienna are Moravians and Bohemians, mainly *Czechs.* This explains much about the movement there. The real Viennese do not go into factories, they become coachmen, domestics or something like that.