---
id: MECW43-162
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 3, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "3 March 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 3 March 1869

DEAR FRED,

*Ecce iterum Crispinus!*[1] Our valued Wilhelm[2] has his own PROCEEDINGS. First, he reprints from the *Revue der Neuen Rheinischen Zeitung* Eccarius' article about 'Tailoring in London',[3] without asking Eccarius and without quoting the *Revue* as his source. Then he writes to Eccarius that he would like to print the article as a pamphlet. Therewith Eccarius replies that, in this case, a 2nd CHAPTER is necessary, since the conditions have changed completely over the last 19 years, something that Wilhelm had absolutely overlooked in his copying craze.

Then a second move by Wilhelm: He writes to Eccarius: he should send him the issue of the *Revue* containing your article on the 'German Peasant War'.

So Wilhelm wanted to reprint your article *without your prior knowledge* and once again *without citing the Revue.*

Luckily, Eccarius informed me yesterday evening at the Central Council. I told him I would write to you about the case and, in the meantime, Eccarius should send him nothing.

With regards to the stuff itself, I have a SPARE COPY I could send to Wilhelm. And I believe—even supposing we should later publish our assorted articles together—that publication in Wilhelm's sheet would do us no harm and the immediate effect of the publication would be very good.

But, UNDER ALL CIRCUMSTANCES, Wilhelm should not be allowed to publish the article as an original contribution for him, instead of as a reprint from the *Revue.*

Write me without delay your *arbitrium.*[4]

Another curiosity. You may have seen in the Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung* that both of us figure as contributors to a workers' paper to be published by Oberwinder in Vienna.[5]

The facts are as follows: About 4 weeks before New Year's Day, Oberwinder had Wilhelm write to me that he wanted to publish an almanac and needed my biography for it. I should send what was necessary to Oberwinder. I sent *simplement*[6] the FACTS and a few DOCUMENTS (Cologne Trial,[7] etc.).[8] Heard nothing further of the matter.

Now, SOME WEEKS SINCE, Oberwinder writes to me that nothing has come of the almanac, but he will place the stuff in a paper he is going to publish. About 6-7,000 subscribers are already assured. Requested me as contributor. J *forgot to answer him;* shall do it today.[9]

Incidentally I would regard it as a good thing if we had a footing in Vienna.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

Apropos. What do the German commercial oxen understand by:

1. PRIMAGE? 2. *Courtage* for the *remboursé*