---
id: MECW43-286
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 10, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 February 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "Published: Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe, International Publishers, 1942; Excerpts from this letter were first published in English in: Marx K., Engels F., Correspondence. 1846-1895, London [1934]; and in"
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

DEAR FRED,

I first went out again last Saturday, but as a result of this damned foggy weather immediately contracted a sort of inflammation of the tonsils. The body is naturally sensitive after some weeks of SEQUESTRATION. A north-east wind is howling here and, under the circumstances, prolongs imprisonment. But I hope to have my throat ALL RIGHT again in the course of this week.

On Sunday, LITTLE Dakyns (the geologist) visited me. I invited him for next Sunday. His Scottish cap was the sole MEMENTO of his costume as Felix Holt, THE RASCAL.[1] He was as sprightly as ever, and Tussy was DELIGHTED to see him.

As far as new things are concerned—such as the Irish Laws, etc.[2] —it is very difficult to get them here SECOND HAND.

Laura writes to us today, inter alia, that since last June the excitement in Paris has been steadily rising. Since the Victor-Noir[3] tragic balladry,[4] the females in the working strata have gone daft, and you know what that means in Paris.

Flourens, the CRACK-BRAINED youngster, is the son OF LATE Flourens, *secrétaire perpétuel de l'Académie*, who always adhered to the existing government throughout his nearly 100 years of life, and who was, in turn, Bonapartist, legitimist, Orleanist and again Bonapartist. During the last years of his life he still made himself noticeable with his fanaticism against Darwin.

Apropos, about Napoleon I. In one of the copies of Cloche that you have, there is, in one of the memoirs—I no longer remember which—a passage about the wretched behaviour of the hero.[5] Jennychen wants to have the quotation. She has had a squabble at the Monroes' about it, where they wished to deny the FACTS.

I have read the first 150 pages of Flerovsky's book[6] (they are taken up by Siberia, North Russia and Astrakhan). This is the first work to tell the truth about Russian economic conditions. The man is a determined enemy of what he calls "Russian optimism." I never held very rosy views of this communistic Eldorado, but Flerovsky surpasses all expectations. In fact it is wonderful and undoubtedly a sign of change that such a thing could be printed in Petersburg at all.

"Our proletariat is small in number but the mass of our working class consists entirely of workers whose lot is worse than the lot of all other proletarians."[7]

The method of presentation is quite original, at times it reminds one most of Monteil.[8] One can see that the man has travelled around everywhere and seen everything for himself. A glowing hatred of landlords, capitalists and officials. No socialist doctrine, no mysticism about the land (although in favour of the communal form of ownership), no nihilistic extravagance. Here and there a certain amount or well-meaning twaddle, which, however, is suited to the stage of development reached by the people for whom the book is intended. In any case this is the most important book which has appeared since your *Condition of the Working Class*. The family life of the Russian peasants--the awful beating to death of wives, the vodka and the concubines--is also well described. It will therefore come quite opportunely if you would now send me the imaginative lies of Citizen Herzen.

You will recall that *Égalité*, inspired by Bakunin, attacked the GENERAL COUNCIL, made all sorts of interpellations publicly, and threatened more.[9] A communication[10] —which I composed—was, thereupon, sent to the *Comité Romand* in Geneva, and ditto to all the other *Comités* of French tongue corresponding with us. Result: The entire Bakunin gang has quit *Egalité*. Bakunin himself has taken up residence in Tessin, and will continue intriguing in Switzerland, Spain, Italy and France. Now the armistice is at an end between us, since he knows that I attacked him heatedly and inveighed against him on the occasion of the latest Geneva *événements*?[11] The brute really imagines that we are '*too bourgeois*' and, therefore, incapable of grasping and esteeming his lofty concepts about 'inheritance right', 'equality', and the replacement of the present state systems by '*l'Internationale*'. Nominally, his 'Alliance de la Démocratie Socialiste'[12] has been dissolved, but, in fact, continues. From the enclosed copy of a letter (which you must return to me) from H. Perret, *secrétaire du Conseil Romand*, to Jung,[13] you will see that, in fact, the catastrophe in Geneva took place before they received our communication there. This, however, strengthened the new *status rerum*.[14] The *Belgian 'Conseil'* (Brussels) has officially declared itself completely in favour of our stand against *Egalité*, but the *secrétaire* of the Belgian COUNCIL, Hins (brother-in-law of De Paepe, but fallen out with him), has sent a letter to Stepney[15] in which he takes Bakunin's side, accuses me of supporting the reactionary party amongst the Geneva workers, etc., etc.

Did you notice, in one of the copies of *Marseillaise* sent to you, that Mr K. Blind had inserted an advertisement for K. Blind in the aforesaid sheet, according to which the aforesaid Blind was sent to Paris as 'ambassador' with General Schurz (*Schütz* does not sound good enough), was exiled from Paris by Bonaparte, and still is! and also was previously *member of the German National Assembly*.![16]

MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS LIZZIE AND FRIENDS.

K. M.

[Postscript from Eleanor Marx]

MY DEAR Engels,

I AM VERY MUCH OBLIGED TO YOU FOR SENDING ME THAT ADVERTISEMENT. THE SITUATION IS ONE THAT WILL SUIT ME VERY WELL, SO I SHALL LOSE NO TIME IN APPLYING FOR IT. YOU WILL I AM SURE GIVE ME A REFERENCE.

WITH THANKS AND BEST LOVE TO ALL.

GOOD BYE.

TUSSY.