---
id: MECW43-114
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, November 20, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "20 November 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913. Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in  Marx-Engels Collected Works"
status: raw
---

To Marx in London

Manchester, 20 November 1868

Dear Moor,

I shall send you some money on Sunday so that you will receive it Monday morning. The stupidity of our cashier is responsible for the fact that it did not already come today. I am sending you £20. *Militairement parlant*,[1] the fellows in Paris have not the **ghost of a chance**, if they launch their attack at present. It is not so easy to get out of this Bonapartism. Without a military revolt, nothing can be done. In my opinion, a coup can only be attempted when at least the *garde mobile*[2] once again stands between the people and the army. It is certain and obvious that Bonaparte *wants* an attempt, and the revolutionaries would be jackasses if they gave him the satisfaction. In addition, the new rifles (1) can very easily be rendered useless (by extracting the pin) and (2) even if they fall into the hands of the insurgents in a usable state, they are valueless if you do not have the specific ammunition, which you cannot *make* like the old cartridges. And why, in fact, should they launch their attack just at this moment? The continuation of *this* state of affairs injures Bonaparte more every day; in addition, there is no special reason for attacking. Bonaparte will also take care not to give *the sort* of reason that only the revolutionaries need.

The secret of the elections in Lancashire is the English workers' hatred of the *Irish*. The damned Murphy cleared the way for the Tories. In the meantime, the Irish state church is finished no matter what. Otherwise things have happened as I said. *The Morning Herald* has already explained that, though the Tories *seemed* to be in the minority, they were really in the majority, since they represent the majority of the people.[3]

If you have not received the £20 by Monday morning, telegraph me immediately. On Sunday I cannot register and would not consider even a registered letter safe in the hands of the post from Saturday evening to Monday morning.

Many greetings.

Your

F. E.

Send me back the letter from Nincompoop,[4] As you know I have to show him what grammatical blunders he makes.