---
id: MECW43-228
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 22, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "22 July 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Marx"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 July 1869

DEAR FRED,

Wilhelm really has colossal impudence, issuing bulls of excommunication on behalf of the General Council of the International.[2]

I had written to him that I, personally, was keeping myself out of this scandal[3] (Hatzfeldt, the old trollop, would like nothing better than to drag me in), particularly since I am just as decidedly against the Lassalle clique as against the People's Party. I added that Wilhelm could give notice (to Schweitzer) that (in accordance with the resolutions of the Brussels Congress) only *real* members will be admitted at Basle. And this he did in a paragraph in the issue *before last*.[4]

After soliciting me in vain to take official steps against Schweitzer, he has had the impudence to involve me in this scandal! I wrote him an extremely rude letter immediately upon receipt of the last *Wochenblatt*,[5] in which I reminded him how often he had already compromised me, and declared frankly that I would *publicly disavow* him as soon as he showed such impudence again.[6] (Impudence which, in addition, is a *lie,* since the General Council has never discussed the Schweitzer affair, etc., let alone passed a resolution.)

It depends on how Schweitzer, *who has been badly provoked,* now acts. I shall cast off Mr Wilhelm if he should get me caught up in dirty work for the third time. The fellow does not even have the excuse that he marches with us through thick and thin. He commits his stupidities on his own behalf, betrays us when he sees fit, and identifies us with him as soon as he sees no other way out.

For about 6 days now I have had a large carbuncle on my left arm which, in this heat, is not pleasant.

I have another family unpleasantness. I have noticed for some time that my wife was not able to manage on the money I give her every week, although there has been no increase in expenditure. Since I am anxious not to run into debt again, and since the money I gave her last Monday had already run out, I asked for an explanation. And the daftness of females then emerged. In the list of debts she had made me for you[7] she had suppressed ABOUT £75, which she was now trying to pay back BY AND BY out of the housekeeping money. Why, I asked? Reply: she would have been afraid to admit to the full sum! Females obviously need to be under constant tutelage!

Jennychen returned yesterday. Although half a year has passed now, Mrs Monroe has not yet paid her. The Scots hold tight to their CASH!

I don't know what to do about the journey. You know that my only aim in this business is to provide Jennychen with the recreation that is practically indispensable for her. But Kugelmann's illness has changed everything. I would not go to Karlsbad[8] to be his comrade-in-sickness, even if I had needed the trip for myself. And now to leave the child as companion with Frau Kugelmann.[9] Nothing at all can come of this. I expect you will write to tell me your opinion.

Mr Schweitzer's discovery that the Geneva committee consists mainly of workers is good![10] Bakunin and Schweitzer state councillors!

Bonaparte's rickety ways will soon lead to defections amongst his generals.

Between Prussia and Russia there is a row that does not seem completely play-acting.

On Monday I wrote to Meissner, tersely and rudely.[11]

Laura and Lafargue and son are now in lodgings in Dieppe. My letter from Paris[12] to Lafargue senior had the desired effect.

*Salut.*

Your

Moor

Both Liebknecht's and Fritzsche's[13] letters indicate clearly that the delightful Wilhelm had directed the latter to me on the money issue.

The ideas the Germans in general hold about our financial means you will see from the enclosed letter from Kugelmann, *voce*[14] Bracke.[15] The fellows never sent a pfennig here. The General Council owes 5 weeks rent, and is in debt to its secretary. Peculiar conceptions!

I do not need to see the biography business. This appears to be a sort of mania with Kugelmann.