---
id: MECW43-100
title: "Letter to Sigfrid Meyer and August Vogt, October 28, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "28 October 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934, and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 32, Moscow, 1964 Published "
status: raw
---

MARX TO SIGFRID MEYER AND AUGUST VOGT

IN NEW YORK

London, 28 October 1868

Dear Meyer and Vogt,

The enclosed credentials for Meyer (I have added the same for you)[1] will show you that your wish had already been met by 13 October. Meyer's appointment was printed in *The Bee-Hive*[2] on 3 October.[3] The GENERAL COUNCIL has resolved that the German correspondents shall correspond with me, Pelletier (for the French) with Dupont, and Eccarius with Jessup. I myself suggested the latter, as I have no time for more correspondence. You can hand the enclosed lines to Jessup[4] and, at the same time, show him your credentials.

With regard to Eccarius there is some misunderstanding. *I* have *never* quarrelled with him; on the contrary I have supported him *to this day* against the ATTACKS by the English, etc.[5] But *he*—his preponderant and often narrow-minded egoism perhaps developed as a result of his circumstances—commits unpleasant tomfooleries from time to time. I generally take no notice of this. Now and then my patience is exhausted. I give him a brain washing, and ALL is RIGHT AGAIN for the time being. The poor devil is, at present, very ill, and he always utilises such moments to say his *pater peccavi.*[6] To what Liebknecht is referring, according to Vogt's letter, I have absolutely no idea. *I,* *at least,* have never written a word to anybody *against* Eccarius EXCEPT in my letter to Meyer, at a moment when I was upset by letters from our other delegates to the Brussels Congress in which they denounced Eccarius.[7] But it is quite possible that Eccarius wrote to Liebknecht without my knowledge in such a way that moved the latter to make his remarks to Vogt. This would be peculiar, since just at that time I had a big dispute with the English about and *for* Eccarius.

As far as *Sorge*^h is concerned, no further action. My lines to Jessup explain the TEMPORARY character of the credentials.

*Cards for members* are no longer available, must be reprinted. Liebknecht is dabbling too much in south German patriotism, and he should not print such nonsense about 'state and society'[8] containing the exact opposite of our opinions. *Salut.* In all haste.

Yours

K. Marx

Apropos. Do you know Dietzgen? He has now returned from Petersburg to the Rhine to establish himself as a small tanner. He is one of the most gifted workers I know, I mean by correspondence. I don't know him personally.

A translation of my book is now appearing in Russian in St. Petersburg.[9] Or did I already inform you of this?

[Enclosure]

[London,] 256 High Holborn, W. C.

Citizen A. Vogt is appointed on 13 October 1868 by the General Council of the International Working Men's Association as corresponding Secretary for the year 1868-69 for the International Working Men's Association (German section in America).

13 October 1868

On behalf of the General Council

*Karl Marx*

SECRETARY FOR GERMANY