---
id: MECW43-159
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, February 25, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "25 February 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913. Printed according to the original. Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works,"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 25 February 1869

Dear Moor,

I have just sent Borkheim a CHEQUE for £162.10, of which £100 is to pay off his advance and £62.10 is for you, which makes, together with the £25 brought to you, the sum of £87.10=1/4 of £350. At the beginning of March, or as soon as I possibly can in March, you will get a further £87.10, then again at the beginning of July, etc.

I *hope* the English press will take the report,[1] but I am firmly convinced that it will not, and that, in the last resort, only *The Bee-Hive* will remain. At best the fellows will make huge cuts.

I have not yet read the resolutions.[2] But at first glance one is surprised that the 1867 Lausanne resolutions are not reprinted also.

NB. about the money: I only had the choice of sending it *through Borkheim* or else in some other way, which would cause gossip here in the office; I preferred the lesser evil. In future this will naturally not happen again.

The final sentence in the report[3] was, of course, aimed only at Liebknecht's sheet[4] and the public.

Foster ON *EXCHANGES* is being sent to you today by GLOBE PARCEL EXPRESS, since the BOOKPOST is not certain enough for an irreplaceable book. If you have *not* received it by Saturday[5] morning, you must immediately complain to GLOBE PARCEL EXPRESS, 150 Cheapside or 150 Leadenhall STREET. Best you should return it the same way. Even by MAIL TRAIN, the GLOBE is much the cheapest way to send *larger* consignments of books.

Regarding the copies, I would immediately haul Wilhelm over the coals, and categorically demand information. The same with Meissner. The fellow has obviously had second thoughts, but since Eichhoff is ready to print, he must decide *oui ou non.*[6]

Nothing but rain here. Apropos, I have written to Borkheim about Bakunin[7] that *he* should raise the question as to whether it is in any way possible for us Westerners to cooperate with this Pan-Slav pack while the fellows preach their Slav supremacy; he will probably read this to you tomorrow[8] when you collect the money—but, in addition, I told him he should discuss the matter with you.

Best greetings to the household.

Your

F. E.