---
id: MECW43-241
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, August 12, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 August 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Marx"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 12 August 1869

Dear Moor,

I have cut the Gordian knot regarding Schnaps[1] by simply informing Tussy of the FACT; whether this has plunged her into a natural conflict I do not know. Unfortunately, however, she now has something else to do, for, since last Friday, she has continuously had horrible toothache in the same tooth that gave her a lot of trouble earlier. So far she has borne the thing with astonishing heroism, but shortened sleep and the long nervous tension have had an effect, and today she looks somewhat exhausted. She said you didn't want the tooth to be pulled out; but I sent her today, since things could not continue thus, together with Lizzie to one of the leading dentists here, and told her she should submit to his judgement. After a long examination he said he hoped to save the tooth, but if the pain did not cease by Saturday morning, the tooth would have to come out. At all events, the child cannot stand this constant and nerve-racking pain every 6 months; her general health suffers far more from this than the whole tooth is worth. But I think I shall soon be able to give better news.

I must just call in at the Schiller Society,[2] and see what has happened in Eisenach.[3] On Saturday the two parties seem to have parted in peace, so they have at least avoided *general* fisticuffs.

The stupidity and meanness of the Urquhartites is demonstrated by the fact that they never mention:

*RESIDENCE IN BULGARIA* BY St. Clair, LATE CAPTN. 28. REGT, AND Ch, Brophy, 1869.

The book is written by two fellows, of whom St. Clair, a former Crimean officer who knows Turkish, Polish, Russian and Bulgarian, lived 3 years in the country, and the other 1½ years, and they are still there. The thing is written in a very lively and graphic style, and is worth more than any other book I know on the subject. For Englishmen the fellows are remarkably free of prejudices, though they have their blind-spots IN ECONOMICS and also IN POLITICS. But they can *see.* They arrived—at least Brophy did—as friends of the Christians, and changed their views completely in favour of the Turks. But since they *also find their blind-spots* in the Turkish governmental system (though here, too, they have something in common with Urquhart), the Urquhartites *are* not *allowed* to mention a book that is worth more than their entire *Free Press,* even from their own point of view. The FACTS in it are worth more to me than all the chatter by the Urquhartites, and SHORT-ARMED Collet can envy the two their description of Russian and French policy in Constantinople. The business is so described that you can read it, moreover with interest, and will be more useful here than 10 years of the *Free Press* with its oracular announcements.

Finished with Gottfried Ermen the day before yesterday.[4] Everything signed.[5] Finally *completely* free from the honorable gentleman.

Best greetings to all.

Your

F. E.