---
id: MECW43-305
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 21, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "21 March 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 21 March 1870

Dear Moor,

Your letter of the day before yesterday[1] was *only* delivered to me *today,* and the state of the envelope (enclosed) leaves no further doubt that the scoundrel Bruce is keeping an eye on our correspondence. I am, therefore, *not* sending these lines by post and, at the same time, a few lines, in which Pigott's letter[2] is returned, are going off to you by post.[3]

Close your envelopes carefully, and seal them with sealing-wax *over* the glue so that the signet-print touches *all four flaps* of the envelope. Your present envelopes are not suitable; the 4 flaps have to come quite close together so that this can be done. This makes things more difficult, so that, in the short time the fellows have they are forced to leave visible evidence, and then one can denounce them publicly. In the meantime, write *important things* to me under the address: Schorlemmer, Owens College, Manchester, or 172 Brunswick Street, Manchester, or S. Moore, 25 Dover Street, Oxford Street, Manchester, and don't write the address yourself. For *very secret* things, the best way is some sort of packet per Globe Parcel Co. like this one. In this way you could also let me have another address; it must *not* be that of your house. It's a good thing that I am soon moving to London, then this will come to an end. I have just given notice on my house. In fact, the beastly government could wish for no better medium than our correspondence in order to keep informed of the activities of the entire proletarian party; the government will also find things in our correspondence that they can utilise with their continental colleagues. At least because of this we must take all precautions. We must not correspond for Stieber's sake.

Jenny can shout: *victoire sur toute la ligne!*[4] If it were not for her, the honourable Gladstone would *never* have granted the new *enquête*[5] How Moore[6] allowed himself to be diddled again by Gladstone concerning this enquiry can be shown by comparing the hopeful NOTE on p. 608 of *The Irishman*, which obviously proceeds from Moore, with Gladstone's Thursday speech, in which he reserved for himself the composition, procedures, etc.[7]

An attempt was also made, probably in Cologne, to open the letter from Solingen[8] to me, but it was unsuccessful, owing to proper use of sealing-wax.

Hearty greetings.

Your

F. E.

In their haste, the fellows laid together the four flaps of the envelope *incorrectly,* the proof is therefore absolute.