---
id: MECW43-076
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, September 24, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 September 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 24 September 1868

Dear Moor,

So *that* is the reason for the sycophantic letter from Schweitzer![1]

The fellow obviously knew what was in store for him when he wrote to you. On the one hand, it may not be altogether unwelcome to him that he can drop the strict Lassallean religion, but fundamentally the loss of the 'tight' organisation and of the possibility to play at dictator is certainly fatal to him. Of course, this is the end of the Lassallean sect's self-important pretence that *it* is 'the party' in Germany, and the sect will gradually expire; it will continue to twitch the longest in the Bergisches Land, the real home of sects.

Incidentally, as Wilhelm[2] rightly guesses, his associations will also come under attack.[3] So much the better. The petty-bourgeois- people's-party-federalist fad of these fellows is not worth a penny. And it is a good thing that the government really stirs up the workers, once it sees that the workers won't let themselves be used by it against the bourgeoisie. Some form or another will surely be found.

But what a comrade Wilhelm is! Less than 4 months since he entered into a 'sort of alliance' with Schweitzer,[4] and today they are again at loggerheads, and he is too SLIPPERY for him. He knew that before, didn't he—but what about the fine lads he had 'assigned to watch him'!

What is this proclamation that you are supposed to issue by all means?[5] And these fine phrases in it about 'persons' which Wilhelm might construe against Baptist[6] and Baptist against Wilhelm! The South German democrat is impossible to get rid of, once you have him in your system. One might think Wilhelm was writing to Struve.

Schloff el (the elder) has turned up again *in Silesia.* I am folding into the returned *Social-Demokrat* some curiosa from the *Zukunft.*

If you had only gone to Nuremberg! You would have been compensated and afterwards been able to start again from the beginning with the SUFFERINGS. I tell you the fellow still can't distinguish you from Struve.

Apropos the dissolution of the General Association of German Workers[7] Wilhelm could now reprint the pertinent passages from my pamphlet,[8] in which all this was predicted for the Lassallean gentlemen. What do you think about it? I could prepare the muck for him, as I still have a few copies here.[9]

Your

F. E.