---
id: MECW43-109
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 14, 1868 (1)"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "14 November 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels and K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 14 November 1868

DEAR FRED,

BEST THANKS FOR *£5.* For the past few days I have had once again the beginning of *carbunculosem.* Since this muck always starts at this time, I immediately began again with the *arsenic.* This should cut off further EVOLUTION. I am sending you subsequently (RATHER *simultaneously)* amusing cuttings from the Paris press, supplied by Lafargue. You must send them back, since Jennychen collects the stuff.

Enclosed also a jolly cutting from *Figaro* on the people's economic conferences UNDER the LEADERSHIP of Rabbi A. Einhorn, GENERALLY KNOWN BY THE NAME OF /. *E. Horn.* This idiot (who is, incidentally, skilled in the practice of *agiotage)* published SOME TIME SINCE a book on the *banks,*[1] of which even the *Economist* said it was obviously written only for children (although the *Times* reviewed it ceremoniously).

Apropos the *Economist,* you would be surprised to hear that, following the example of *Thornton* in the *Fortnightly Review,*[2] the *Economist* declared[3] verbatim: '*No* "LAW" *OF DEMAND AND SUPPLY,* IN *ANY SENSE* WHICH HAS YET BEEN ASSIGNED TO THESE WORDS, *EXISTS;* NEITHER IN FACT, NOR IN TENDENCY, DO MARKET PRICES CONFORM TO THE RULE COMMONLY SUPPOSED TO GOVERN THEM.'

The great *Büchner* has sent me his '*Sechs Vorlesungen etc. über die Darwin'sche Theorie,* etc.' The book was not yet out when I was visiting Kugelmann. And he (Büchner) has now already sent me the *second edition!* The way such books are made is NICE. Büchner, for instance (as everybody who has read Lange's balderdash[4] knows anyway), states that his *CHAPTER on materialist philosophy* has been copied mainly from this very Lange. And this same Büchner looks down pityingly on *Aristotle,* whom he obviously only knows by hearsay! What really amused me, however, was the following passage with regard to the works of *Cabanis*[5] (1798):

'You might almost be listening to Karl Vogt* when you read (in Cabanis) expressions like these: "The brain is intended for thinking, as the stomach is meant for digestion or the liver for secreting the bile from the blood", etc.'[6] *

Büchner obviously believes that Cabanis has copied from K. Vogt. Even to imagine the opposite exceeds the critical faculties of the worthy Büchner. He appears to have first learned of Cabanis from Lange! *Ce sont des savants sérieux!*[7]

Paris is haunted. The Baudin affair is really reminiscent of the banquet movement under Louis Philippe.[8] Only today there is no National Guard, and Bugeaud (as far as brutality comes into play) is READY from the first day, while in February he was the last to be called upon and at a moment when there existed *no* ministry, that is to say, under the conditions at that time, *no government.* Moreover, barricade-building is useless. Leaving aside the Weber[9] -Pyat bulls of excommunication, I cannot see how a revolution in Paris could be SUCCESSFUL, apart from treason and defection or division in the army.

I have put a new bee into the bonnets of the Urquhartites (since *Collet* invited me and my family to visit him last Sunday week:[10] I had not seen him personally for years), a bee that is now being very *seriously* debated between Collet and Urquhart, namely that *Peel's Bank Act of 1844* makes it possible for the Russian Government, under CERTAIN CONJUNCTURES OF THE MONEY-MARKET, to force the Bank of England into bankruptcy. Despite my diplomacy with Collet, I could not keep silent as he driveled on about *Ireland,* and told him MOST DECIDEDLY, to his face, my VIEWS ON THIS QUESTION.

Tussy is attending private gymnastic classes. HER COMPLIMENTS TO MRS BURNS. *Salut.*

Your

K. M.