---
id: MECW43-226
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 18, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "18 July 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "Fragment of this letter first published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the f"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 18 July 1869

Dear Moor,

Glad the journey went off so well.

Many thanks for what you sent. The letters will be returned tomorrow.

If Schweitzer attacks the International, we should consider whether to oblige him.

Frightful muck is developing as the Lassallean swindle putrefies. Fritzsche wanted 1,800 thalers from Schweitzer and, when he turned him down, then you should get him 3,000 thalers. The fellow is obviously just as big a blackguard as Schweitzer. From the beginning, Lassalle introduced venality, and this has grown. But where did Schweitzer get the money from, if not the Prussians?

The calm assumption that the English workers should provide £450 for Fritzsche, even before he and his consorts have joined the IWA, is really good. I truly believe that Wilhelm *absolutely* incited Fritzsche to saddle you with himself.

You long ago read the renowned letter sent me 2 years ago. Naked assertion was the only argument to the effect that he could not and should not have acted otherwise. He also said he and his consorts had nothing in common with the People's Party[1] except the name! That's a good one! He is past all remedy.

Heat? Terrible. Yesterday I lay on the floor half the night because it was simply too hot to go to bed. It is so hot that even these few lines have bathed me in sweat.

Enclosed Kugelmann.[2] What do you think of his plans? Karlsbad[3] would be *quite excellent* for you, but Jenny meanwhile in Hanover? What do you say?

Your

F. E.