---
id: MECW43-057
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 13, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 August 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 13 August 1868

I hope that these lines will reach you before your departure, for there is *periculum in mora.*[2] Firstly,* I must send money to Ramsgate, so they can stay there another week. As their departure was delayed for weeks after your last remittance, smaller domestic debts were paid; on the other hand, my wife had to retrieve watches and other things from the pawnshop so that they could appear RESPECTABLE at the watering place.*

*Secondly,* one of the *épiciers*[3] who is owed £6 and a few shillings, must be paid this week, since the man is shutting up shop.

*Thirdly,* I have already received 2 SUMMONS for QUEENS TAXES (about £8). The LOCAL TAXES are paid, as you know. I absolutely cannot put off these sums.

For two further pressing items—the LANDLORD, who is unfortu- nately in London now, and a bill of exchange for £12 payable on the 25th of this month—I shall still perhaps receive money in time from Germany.

I have written to my cousins August and Karl Philips in Amsterdam and Aachen in order to find out whether they are back.[4] It would be a sheer waste of money to go to the continent in order to borrow, before one is sure that the people are there.

For the past week I have not had a wink of sleep and *l'illustre* Gaudissart[5] Borkheim, who visited me the day before yesterday to take leave, said I really should get rid of my jaundice. He entertained me with the story of the £1,000 he is trying to blackmail out of Oppenheim.

In great haste.

Your

K. M.