---
id: MECW43-295
title: "Letter to Peter Imandt, February 23, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 February 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works,* Second Russian Edition, Vol. 32, Moscow 1964 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO PETER IMANDT

IN DUNDEE

[London,] 23 February 1870

Dear Imandt,

As far as I am aware, debts contracted abroad are not recoverable by legal action in Scotland. I expect any old SOLICITOR there would confirm this for you.

On superannuation the *Code Civil* states," Article 2262, that *all plaints* are superannuated after 30 years; Article 2265: who acquires something in *good faith*—superannuation in 10, respec- tively 20 years; *Article 2271*: the plaint of masters and teachers of sciences and arts regarding instruction given *monthly,* superan- nuates in *6 months.*

The whole officiousness of the Prussians is obviously *simply an attempt to browbeat you,* and you can just laugh in the fellows' faces. It would only be inconvenient if the counter-bills are made out *on word of honour.* This would not alter things legally, but would be compromising. But this is surely not the case?

As you perhaps know, Dronke went bankrupt in a big way, then disappeared. According to some he is again haunting Liverpool; according to others, however, he is knocking about in Paris or Spain. In any case, you can get the most certain and reliable news about him *from Schily.*

[1][2]

That scamp Biscamp continues to send his inspirations to the *Augsburg Allgemeine Zeitung* and the *Weser-Zeitung* ditto, also, the *Post,*)[3] published here by Juch since the New Year (*Hermann* has passed into Bismarckian hands[4]. I read nothing of all this, and still less do any personal relations exist. As far as I know, the Hesse Cassel man[5] is hanging out SOMEWHERE in the London area, and is once again 'husband'. Since you...[6]