---
id: MECW43-304
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 19, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "19 March 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Extract published in Marx and Engels on Ireland, Progress Publishers, 1971; Publishe"
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

This letter was written on a form stamped: 'General Council of the International Working Men's Association, 256, High Holborn, London, W.C;the letter carries an oval stamp 'International Working Men's Central Council London'.

Dear Fred,

Enclosed is a *Marseillaise,* which should, however, be returned with the preceding one. I haven't read it myself yet. The article was written jointly by Jennychen and myself because she didn't have sufficient time. That is also why she hasn't answered your letter and sends Mrs. Lizzy her thanks for the shamrock provisionally through me.

From the enclosed letter from Pigott to Jenny you'll see that Mrs. O'Donovan, to whom Jenny sent a private letter together with 1 *Marseillaise*[1] *,* took her for a gentleman, even though she signed it Jenny Marx. I answered Pigott today on behalf of Jennychen and took the opportunity to explain to him in short my views on the Irish question.

Your HINT about Bruce's falsification has already been used in the letter Jenny sent yesterday to the *Marseillaise*.[2] We have Knox' et Pollock's Report[3] (but did not consult it) and ditto 'THINGS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN'. On the other hand, you would oblige me if you would send by return: 1. Lassalle's publication against Schulze-Delitzsch, and 2. the book by 'Clement', the crazy Frisian.[4]

The sensation caused by Jennychen's second letter (which contained the condensed translation of O'Donovan's letter) in Paris and London has robbed the loathsome and importunate (but very fluent with gab and pen) Talandier of his sleep. He had denounced the Irish as Catholic idiots in the *Marseillaise. Now* he espouses their cause no less fullmouthed in a review of what has been said in the *Times, Daily Telegraph* and Daily *News* about O'Donovan's letter. Since Jennychen's second letter was unsigned (by accident) he apparently flattered himself with the idea that he would be considered the secret sender. This has been frustrated by Jennychen's third letter. This fellow *is du reste* a teacher of French at the military school of Sandhurst.

Last Tuesday,[5] I was back again, for the first time, at a meeting of the GENERAL COUNCIL. With me—Felix Holt, THE RASCAL.[6] He had a very good time since, for a change, there was really something interesting going on. As you know, the *prolétaires 'positivistes'* in Paris had sent a deputy[7] to the Basle Congress. There was a discussion as to whether he should be admitted, since he represented a philosophical society and not a workers' society (although he a n d his consorts all belong 'personally' to the WORKING GLASS). Finally, he was admitted as a delegate of personal MEMBERS of the '*Internationale*'. These fellows have now constituted themselves in Paris as a *branche* of the *Internationale*—an event about which the London and Paris Comtists have made a great FUSS. They thought that they had driven in THE THIN WEDGE. T h e GENERAL COUNCIL, being informed by the 'prolétaires positivistes' of their affiliation, reminded t h em politely that the COUNCIL could only permit their admission after examining their programme. So they sent a programme—real Comtist-orthodox—which was discussed last Tuesday. In the chair was Mottershead[8] a very intelligent (though anti-Irish) old Chartist, and a personal enemy of, and expert on, Comtism.[9] After a longish debate: Since they are workers they may be admitted as a simple branch. Not, however, as '*branche positiviste*', since the principles of Comtism directly contradict our Rules. And anyway, it was their own affair how they reconciled their philosophical private views with those of our Rules.

About the screeds from Solingen soon.

*Salut*

Your

Moro