---
id: MECW43-337
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 18, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "18 May 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Extract published in Marx and Engels Correspond"
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 18 May 1870**
DEAR FRED,

On Monday we shall be travelling to join you for 14 days, not longer, since Tussy is interrupting all her lessons. It's no go this week, since SWEET Jennychen has holidays until Monday, and we should not leave her alone for this period.

The enclosed muck from Heinzen discloses at the tail-end—the false story about my relationship with Lassalle—who is prompting Heineke, the doughty bondsman. It is OLD Hatzfeldt, probably operating through Weber junior, who deliberates in New York. Incidentally, Heineke is making a grievous mistake if he expects me to honour him with a word of rebuttal. He has been working to this end for years—to no avail!

Our members in France are giving the French government ocular proof of the difference between a secret political society and a genuine workers' organisation. No sooner had the government jailed all the members of the Paris, Lyons, Rouen, Marseilles, etc., committees (some of them fled to Belgium and Switzerland) than *twice the number* of committees announced themselves as their successors with the most daring and provocative declarations in the newspapers (and as an additional precaution added their private addresses as well). At last the French government has done what we have so long wanted it to do and transformed the political question, Empire or Republic, into a question of life or death for the working-class.

In general the plebiscite[1] dealt the final blow to the empire. Because so many voted aye for the empire wreathed in constitutional phrases Boustrapa[2] believes he can now quite unceremoniously restore the empire *sans phrase*, that is to say, the December regime. According to all the information received privately the Society of 10 December[3] has been fully restored in Paris and is teeming with activity.

Greetings
Yours
**KM**

The transfer of the congress to Mainz—UNANIMOUSLY VOTED yesterday—will give Bakunin a fit.