---
id: MECW43-047
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 23, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 July 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 23 July 1868

DEAR FRED,

BEST THANKS for the £25. The children will probably go to the sea next week together with MR and MRS Lafargue. Since yesterday Lafargue has been 'MEMBER OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEONS' and has received his patent for the KILLING OF MEN AND BEASTS. Then, in 4-5 weeks, he will go to Paris. As a result, we are in a very embarrassing position, since my wife still has to buy linen for Laura for at least £20.

I do not think we can do any business with Borkheim. Yesterday he told me that 'money was very tight' in his case, etc. The Dutchmen, of whom I can, in fact, only use August Philips, are travelling. But I shall use my head to see how and where to get a loan, since it is *absolutely necessary.* The practice of borrowing at 20% can in fact only happen with institutions like those utilised by Borkheim, where people lose the capital advanced if one kicks the bucket before the date of maturity.

About Dr Boruttau, the man with the sultry prick, I know nothing except that he also 'runs with' the Lassalleans (Schweitzer FRACTION). The funniest thing is the 'French' of his dedication to a

You will have seen that my book[1] forms a point of discussion in

[2]

the programme of the General Association of German Workers.[3]

I have sent you a scrawl by Dühring which despite the heat you might read. You could also tell me your impressions of it, since it is certainly not overtaxing. But all the more boring, to be sure.

I saw Prof. Beesly last week at Lafargue's. Beesly was absent when your article[4] arrived. Immediately after his return he received it and sent it to Henry Morley[5] (CHIEF EDITOR of *The Fortnightly Review)* in Scotland, from whence we have received no further NEWS as yet.

How do you live in this heat? I lose all capacity for thought, and without Gumpert's medicine I COULD NOT STAND IT AT ALL.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.