---
id: MECW43-211
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, June 26, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 June 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Extract published in *Marx Engels on Literature"
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

Dear Fred,

With THANKS I notify the £90, first half-notes. Enclosed for Tussy 2 LETTERS. She must reply to tight-fisted Collet.

The enclosed letter from Eichhoff shows, unfortunately, that his brother has become skittish.[1] Write me what should happen now. The last proof-sheets finally arrived and have been returned, ditto preface sent.[2] It now turns out that the procrastination was for two reasons: 1. Mr Wigand in Leipzig is the printer, and 2. Mr Meissner, for his part, does not keep a watch on the Leipziger. He really believed that I had received the last sheets direct from Leipzig several weeks ago. German sloppiness!

The honourable Wilhelm is maintaining a deep silence.

Today the weather finally TURNS to the better.

I have received an invitation from the SOCIETY OF ARTS[3] for a *conversazione* in Kensington Museum on 1 July. This takes place only once a year, and is attended by the entire London aristocracy, from the court down to, etc. So Jennychen will have a chance to see this rabble.[4]

*Addio*.

Your

K. M.

While re-arranging my bookshelves a small old edition of Rochefoucauld's *Réflexions* etc. fell into my hands again. Leafing through it, I found:

'La gravité est un mystère du corps, inventé pour cacher les défauts de l'esprit'[5] [56].

Thus, pinched by Sterne from Rochefoucauld![6]

And these are nice too:

'Nous avons tous assez de force pour supporter les maux d'autrui' [5].

'Les vieillards aiment à donner de bons préceptes, pour se consoler de n'être plus en état de donner de mauvais exemples' [20].

'Les rois font des hommes comme des pièces de monnaye; ils les font valoir ce qu'ils veulent; et l'on est forcé de les recevoir selon leur cours, et non pas selon leur véritable prix' [126].

'Quand les vices nous quittent, nous nous flattons de la créance que c'est nous qui les quittons' [39].

'La modération est la langueur et la paresse de l'âme, comme l'ambition en est l'activité et l'ardeur' [63].

'Nous pardonnons souvent à ceux qui nous ennuyent, mais nous ne pouvons pardonner à ceux que nous ennuyons' [65].

'Ce qui fait que les amants et les maîtresses ne s'ennuyent point d'êtres ensemble, c'est qu'ils parlent toujours d'eux-mêmes'[7] [67].

I attended the TRADES UNIONS MEETING LAST WEDNESDAY,[8] in Exeter Hall.[9] Beesly delivered a really fine, very impudent SPEECH, recalling the June days (it was 24 JUNE).[10] The newspapers naturally KILLED, i.e., SUPPRESSED, him. In addition, he committed the crime of speaking very contemptuously of English journalists.