---
id: MECW43-043
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 11, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "11 July 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

London, 11 July 1868

DEAR FRED,

The £10 received with BEST THANKS. I immediately paid £3 5s. for taxes, £3 to the CHEESEMONGER (whom, by the way, I have been paying cash for weeks, since he, just like the TEA-GROCER, no longer puts it on the slate), £1 10s. to the chemist. I owe the baker about £17 and the man, who was always very friendly with us, is in great difficulties. It is awful for me that I have to press you like this. If I only knew how to find any *direct* way out!

The children[2] are doing fairly well, though Jennychen is still very weak. The ruling TEMPER here in the house is not exactly made for convalescents. My wife is not in the best of shape either, and therefore unnecessarily IRRITABLE.

Enclosed:

1. *Kugelmann:* I answered him right away[3] saying he should *be sure not* to loose the intended letter upon Faucher, the Mannequin Pisse.[4]

2. The review by the worthy Faucher;[5] another in the *Literarisches Zentralblatt?*[6] Both to be returned to me.

3. Letter from Dietzgen, who has also written an article on my book for me.[7]

You cannot fully appreciate the farce Mannequin Pisse Faucher is putting on in making me a pupil of Bastiat. Bastiat states in his *Harmonies*:[8]

'If anybody were to explain to him, on the basis of the determination of value by labour time, why air has *no* value and a *diamond* a *high* value, he would throw his book into the fire.'

Since I have now accomplished this terrible trick, Faucher must prove that I, in fact, accept Bastiat, who declares that there exists 'no measure' of value.

The manner in which Mr Bastiat derives the value of the diamond is given in the following truly commercial-traveller-type conversation:

'Monsieur, cédez-moi votre diamant.— Monsieur, je veux bien; cédez-moi en échange votre travail de toute une année.'[9]

Instead of the business friend answering: '*Mon cher, si j'étais condamné à travailler, vous comprenez bien que j'aurai autre chose à acheter que des diamants'^*[10] he says:

'Mais, monsieur, vous n'avez pas sacrifié à votre acquisition une minute.—Eh bien, monsieur, tâchez de rencontrer une minute semblable.— Mais, en bonne justice, nous devrions échanger à *travail égal.*—Non, en bonne justice, vous appréciez vos services et moi les miens. Je ne vous force pas; pourquoi me forceriez-vous? Donnez-moi un an tout entier, ou cherchez vous même un diamant.— Mais cela m'en entraînerait à dix ans de pénibles recherches, sans compter une déception probable au bout. Je trouve plus sage, plus profitable d'employer ces dix ans d'une autre manière.—C'est justement pour cela que je crois vous rendre encore *service* en ne vous demandant qu'un an. Je vous en épargne neuf, et voilà pourquoi j'attache beaucoup de *valeur* à ce *service.***[11] **

Is it not a wine salesman to the very life? Incidentally—and the German Bastiatites do not know this— that unhappy assertion that the value of commodities is determined, not by the labour they cost, but by the labour which they *spare* the buyer (the babbling about the connection between exchange and the division of labour is childish talk) is just as little Bastiat's discovery as any of the other of his wine-salesman categories.

The old jackass Schmalz, the Prussian demagogue-catcher,[12] says (German edition 1818, *French* 1826):

'Le travail d'autrui en général ne produit jamais pour nous qu'une *économie de temps,* et cette économie de temps est tout ce qui constitue sa *valeur* et son *prix.* Le menuisier, par exemple, qui me fait une table, et le domestique qui porte mes lettres à la poste, qui bat mes habits, ou qui cherche pour moi les choses qui me sont nécessaires, me rendent l'un et l'autre *un service* absolument de même nature: l'un et l'autre *m'épargne* et le temps que je serais obligé d'employer moi-même à mes [ces] occupations, et celui qu'il m'aurait fallu consacrer à m'acquérir l'aptitude et les talents qu'elles exigent.'[13]

Old Schmalz was an epigone of the physiocrats.[14] He says this in a polemic directed against A. Smith's *travail productif* and *improductif,*[15] and proceeds from their thesis that only agriculture produces real value. He found that in *Garnier}*[16] Similar stuff, on the other hand, in *Ganilh,*[17] epigone of the mercantilists. Ditto in polemics against the same differentiation made by A. Smith. Thus, polemics by epigones representing two standpoints, with neither having the slightest conception of value,—and Bastiat copies them! And this is the latest discovery in Germany! A pity that no paper exists in which one can expose this plagiarism by Bastiat.[18]

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.