---
id: MECW43-048
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 29, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 July 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 29 July 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed Liebknecht returned.[1] What a feeble business with Schweitzer. He should *recognise* 1. you and 2. the International Working Men's Association! Wilhelmchen appears to me to have once again failed to control his tendency to stupidities. Incidentally, you see that Schweitzer did, after all, show off with your letters.[2]

As regards Liebknecht's promises about Nuremberg and the Swiss workers, I SHALL WAIT FOR PERFORMANCE BEFORE GIVING AN OPINION.

Now enclosed a letter from Kugelmann.;[3] The business with Keil is splendid—if Kertbény is not in fact inventing a bit. Just in case, I sat down and scribbled in great haste the enclosed scrawl, trying to make it as Beta-like as possible—as is suitable for that miserable rag[4] kindly let me have your comments on it by return so that we may send the stuff off without delay and strike while the iron is hot. We may not despise this bit of humbug, any more than we despise the stratagems through Siebel's mediation.[5] And the Kinkels, Freiligraths and Blinds, etc., will be badly annoyed; the philistine, however, as you know, trusts his *Gartenlaube,* and it will greatly impress Meissner. Your wife will also enjoy it very much—I think it would be best if you keep it secret for the time being, because of possible disappointment, and then you will surprise her when the paper comes out.

It is a good thing that owing to the delay of the article[6] caused by Beesly's absence I get some time for the second one.[7] Working at night still affects my eye slightly, and it then hurts all the next day.

Best greetings to your wife, the girls and Lafargue and his spouse. In haste.

Your

F. E.