---
id: MECW43-319
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, April 19, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "19 April 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 19 April 1870

Dear Moor,

I forgot to write to you on Friday[1] that I had no money in the house and could, therefore, enclose nothing for that poor devil Dupont.[2] Enclosed S/6 11,916, Leeds, 15 July 1869—£5 for him. I hope it will suffice him until he has found a place again.

About Schapper, write to me, too, how things are going. I have not yet seen Gumpert. I am, however, firmly convinced that plenty of exercise during the present marvellous weather will do you a lot of good, and will constitute an excellent pre-cure to Karlsbad.[3] Yesterday, with Schorlemmer, I walked some 17-18 miles; you do the same, and you will soon forget you have a liver.

Today I am returning you 2 issues of *Marseillaise* and *Égalité* and the Vienna newspaper,[4] and enclose a few cuttings from the *Examiner and Times* on Ireland, which are particularly remarkable since they come from a Methodist who, as a result of his isms (TEETOTALISM), etc., hangs out with the /smists here; otherwise, the *Examiner* would certainly not have accepted them. I shall need them later, so send them back sometime.[5]

Apropos, what is Mr Williams[6] doing? Tussy writes that he is still working, but I see no results.

I ordered Flerovsky[7] some time ago, but have heard nothing further, so I assume it has been confiscated and is no longer available.

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.