---
id: MECW43-247
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, September 5, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "5 September 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 5 September 1869

Dear Moor,

Got back here again midday yesterday[1] from Ostend. I arrived in London at 6.15 in the morning, found a train going here at 7.30, and journeyed on through, since I had scarcely slept all night, and was good for nothing else. I also thought you were away with Jenny, and only here heard the contrary. This delay in your departure looks a little queer to me; I can't think that the Basle Congress[2] is alone to blame, and I am forced to ask myself whether it is not a money matter. When you asked for the £75 I sent you 100, imagining you could use the rest for the journey; since, however, I did not state this in so many words, you perhaps found another use for it; if this is so, *telegraph* me *tomorrow morning* (before 10 o'clock if possible), saying *how much you need.* We shall, you see, be leaving for Dublin tomorrow evening,[3] and I shall be going into town around 11-12 to look after money matters, so I could deal with this at the same time.

[4]

I was in Engelskirchen for a few days. People in Germany are becoming increasingly stupid. It is true that the workers' movement is closing in upon them threateningly, and they all flirt with it and have NOSTRUMS of all sorts, but their intelligence has not become any sharper; the opposite is true. My brother,[5] for instance, wanted to solve the social problem by 'redeeming labour', just as he redeems factory installations, buildings, machinery etc., by, for instance, putting a groschen *on the price* of each pound of yarn, and thus paying off the workers who have become old, sick and disabled! The *bonhomme*[6] was very surprised when I explained to him how hopelessly naive and absurd this idea was, and he finally promised to read your book[7] Concerning the Prussian journeymen's provident funds, he gave me an article in Engel's statistical journal; the most blatant infamies of the statutes of Saxony are *not* present there, but otherwise everything similar.[8]

The greatest man in Germany is undoubtedly Strousberg. The fellow will soon become German Kaiser. Everywhere you go people talk of nothing but Strousberg. Incidentally, the fellow is not as bad as all that. My brother, who had negotiations with him, has described him very vividly to me. He has a lot of humour and some brilliant qualities, and, in any case, is immeasurably superior to Hudson the RAILWAY KING. He is now buying up all sorts of industrial establishments, and immediately cuts the working time to 10 hours everywhere, without reducing wages. He also has the clear knowledge that he will end up a really poor wretch. His main principle is: only swindle share-holders, but deal fairly with contractors and other industrialists. In Cologne I saw his portrait on exhibition; not bad at all, jovial. His background is completely dark; some say he is a qualified lawyer; according to others he kept a brothel in London.

Wilhelmchen[9] has now fallen so low that he may no longer say that Lassalle cribbed from you, and wrongly at that. This has emasculated the whole biography, and only he can know why he continues to print it.

And he has declared the miserable *Felleisen,* not even the *Vorbote,* the journal of the bumpkins in Switzerland.[10] They are a fine bunch. Cf. the debate about social-democratic, democratic- social, or social-democratic + democratic-social workers' party at the Eisenach Congress. And Rittinghausen their prophet![11]

Wilhelm still makes no mention of the *18th Brumaire.* Here, too, he would have to 'omit' various things that 'might upset' him and others!

With best wishes from all of us to all of you.

Your

F. E.

Enclosed—a picture for transmission to the zoologist Vogt. Liebknecht can arrange this through his friend Goegg. It is democratic in front and socialist behind, thus completely orthodox and democratic-socialist.