---
id: MECW43-251
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 30, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "30 September 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

Hanover, 30 September 1869

DEAR FRED,

Your letter arrived yesterday evening. Better news today from London on Schnappy's health.[1] Laura and Lafargue intend to leave London as soon as the little one's condition makes it possible. Under these circumstances, Tussy's *IMMEDIATE RETURN* to London appears necessary. Laura will hold it against her very much if she should leave for Paris without Tussy attempting to see the Lafargue family first.

I have *just* gossiped away an hour with a deputation of 4 Lassalleans sent to me by the local branch of the German General Workers' Association.[2] I naturally conducted myself with great reserve and diplomacy, but *sub rosa*[3] I informed the people of the necessary.[4] We parted good friends. I naturally rejected their invitation—extended in the name of the Association—to lecture to them.

On Sunday another delegation arrives from Brunswick: Bracke, Bonhorst, Spier.[5] This is less agreeable to me.

Liebknecht writes that he can't come because of the Prussians.[6]

But: 1. In this way, to Hamburg 2 days instead of 4 hours. 2. Simply for travelling expenses—extra expenditure of ABOUT 40 thaler. I NEITHER LIKE NOR AM ABLE TO AFFORD.[7]

I must close, since the mail is only open until 1.15 (the first) and now it is 10 MINUTES PAST ONE. Shall speak to Meissner about your book.[8]

Your

K. M.