---
id: MECW43-239
title: "Letter to Jenny Marx Longuet, August 8, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "8 August 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published in *Friedrich Engels. 1820-1970. Referate, Diskussionen, Dokumente,* Hanover, 1971 Published in English in: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX (DAUGHTER)

IN LONDON

Manchester, 8 August 1869

Dear Jenny,

I have received Lizzie's orders to thank you, in her name, for the very handsome and very considerate present you made her in the volume of Moore's *Irish Melodies*.[1] You could not have made her a greater pleasure. She knows, from her childhood, most of the tunes, but scarcely one of them completely, and so now she can refresh her rather broken-down memory from the book.

Next Sunday[2] there is to be a grand Irish concert in which the whole Fenian and non-Fenian company, convicted and uncon- victed, will have to join. I only regret that the whole musical talent of our house will be unable to take full advantage of the book when Tussy will have left us; but then, Mary Ellen *will* have to learn as much as is required for that.

When are you and Moor going to Holland and Germany?[3] I have now, at last, made my arrangements. I shall have to be in Ostend on the evening of the 17th or morning of the 18th August and intend to stay there for about a week.[4] Probably I shall come over to London on Monday the 16th and spend a day with you, and to see whether I cannot make arrangements to meet you and Moor somewhere in Germany. If not, I shall very likely come straight home again from Ostend. I hope, however, that you will, in the meantime, bring your plans to some state of maturity so as to enable us to have a bottle of hock together in its native country. With kind regards to Moor and your Mama, I remain

Yours faithfully

F. Engels