---
id: MECW43-175
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 29, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "29 March 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published in part in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Mar"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 29 March 1869

DEAR FRED,

Best thanks for the CHEQUE and the STAMPS. I paid Lucraft last Tuesday.?[1] Have you seen the short report about the demonstration in *The Times* OF SATURDAY LAST[2] It states that a German group ('of our people!') carried a red flag inscribed *Proletarier aller Länder, verunreiniget Euch!,* which they said in English, means 'RAGAMUFFINS OF ALL REGIONS, BEFOUL YOURSELVES!'

As you correctly assume, I am cold-maddened and cold-stupefied.

The children left on Friday[3] evening (to the horror of the English, on GOOD FRIDAY). We received a letter from them this morning. They arrived safely in Paris, but had a stormy crossing.

I am not yet a FREEBORN BRITON. One resists such a step as long as one can.[4]

Nothing could be more gallant than the way Wilhelm the Honourable is extracting himself from the affair of the *Vogt* copies.[5] At my INSTIGATION, Kugelmann wrote to him about it. No reply to the first letter, and to another letter he received the enclosed screed, which may be summed up as follows: If *I* (Liebknecht) announced [the despatch of] 60 copies, but only 6 arrived, you should be aware that J *always lie,* so there the matter must rest. If, however, C. Hirsch of Berlin advised you of the number (he naturally does not know that *I* advised Kugelmann), it is a different matter and must be investigated.

The sort of artful dodges the fellow gets up to is displayed in a letter from Hirsch to Kugelmann. Hirsch writes to Kugelmann:[6]

'Liebknecht probably hopes for nothing more than that you should circulate the books IN QUESTION in Hanover, in order to enlighten the Democratic Party there about the doings of Herr Vogt, etc'

Thus Wilhelm kept it secret from Hirsch that / had demanded information about the state of affairs, and an assured place for storing those copies still available.

Kugelmann writes:

'The coming clash of words between Liebknecht and Schweitzer reminds me less of Luther and Eck than of Pater José and Rabbi Juda....' 'But it seems to me, as well, that the rabbi and the monk, both of them to heaven smell'[7]

With regard to this clash of words, I received (today) the enclosed letter from *Bebel.* Since the 60-copy letter,[8] Wilhelm himself does not dare write to me—until more water has flowed under the bridge.

They are amazing fellows! First they wilfully get themselves into a situation where they are bound to get a drubbing. Then I am supposed to intervene as *deus ex machina* and elegantly reject Schweitzer's resolution on the acceptance of the programme of the International, should Schweitzer's general meeting pass it![9] And all this after Wilhelm and Co. have not taken *one single step* about the International *since the Nuremberg Congress,*[10] have done absolutely *nothing* so that those poor devils in Lugau found it necessary to turn directly to London.[11] I believe Bebel to be useful and able. He only had the particular misfortune to find his 'theoretician' in Mr Wilhelm.

Something else demonstrates the fellows' carelessness and sloppiness: to date they have not informed me of a single FACT to prove the charges of high treason, etc., levelled against Schweitzer. Fine businessmen.

*Lloyd's Paper,* in the Sunday number a week ago,[12] carried long hymns of praise about our RESOLUTIONS and the INTERNATIONAL ASSOCIATION in general.

I have received a letter from Dietzgen, who is a prosperous tanner in Siegburg..[13] I shall send it to you as soon as it is answered. Dietzgen's ideas will be published by Meissner, for whom he has guaranteed the printing costs, under the title: *Die Kopfarbeit, dargestellt von einem Handarbeiter usw. Salut.* Greetings to MRS Lizzie and the two accomplices[14]

Your

K. M.