---
id: MECW43-010
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 21, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 April 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 21 April 1868

DEAR FRED,

BEST THANKS FOR THE £10. Yesterday I went out for a walk again, and now here comes Jennychen to drive me out again on the pretext that you entrusted her with supervision over me.

My arm is in order again, there is just the healing itch. For some years now I have made the curious observation that my urine, which in my normal state deposits chalk or whatever it is, becomes quite clear when I have carbuncles. And in fact the mineral deposit is now appearing again. Perhaps Gumpert knows something about it.

Apropos. Wilhelm is now sending me his rag, too.[1] How loyal it is of the man to call my *Herr Vogt* a **deserving* book' instead of saying that there are many bad jokes in it.[2] And then: the Prussians persecute Hanoverians who were 'loyal to their king'! Then: regarding Edgar Bauer on the paying of the South German press, that, if things go on like that, ****all'* men of honour (country squires, priests, democrats, the Elector of Hesse,[3] etc.) will combine against Prussia.[4] POOR Wilhelm!

Blind has again made one of his great coups. With the aid of a servile message he has squeezed a reply from Juarez, which is in the *Courrier français* today. It is time this clown got a bang on the head for his buffoonery.

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.