---
id: MECW43-136
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 19, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "19 December 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43, p. 195; First published: abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Berlin, 1931."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**Dear Fred**,

**Thanks** for your marginal notes! When I wrote to you that evening I was excited. But the next morning there was already a reaction and the decision to treat the matter diplomatically, quite as you advise.

Ténot's *Province* is much better. It contains many new details for us. Had the Parisians held out a couple of days longer, the *Empire* would have been *foutu*. [finished] The movement (republican) among the rural population was much bigger than we knew.

Enclosed *Réveil,* the organ of Ledru-Rollin. Delescluze his *ame damnée, républicain de vieille roche, asinus.* He is the provisional government's commissioner who led the Belgians into the *guet-àpens* of Risquons Tout. Thus traitor or arch-**ass**. Probably the latter.

The stupid idea of the workers who wanted to give a banquet for [U.S. Ambassador in London] R. Johnson has been blocked *by us.* Coningsby, whose initiative it was, is a blackguard. This character was on a **pleasure trip to the United States** and was paid by Seward for this London reception for R. Johnson. He is the same **workman** who wrote to *The Times* years ago, stating that the workers were politically satisfied and **did not want the suffrage**.

If you could send me a few £ for the Christmas week now beginning, it would be very welcome.

*Salut*.

Your
K. M.