---
id: MECW43-112
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 18, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "18 November 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931  Published in English for the first time in Mar"
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

London, 18 November[1] 1868

Dear Fred,

The **landlord** (unfortunately he is living *pro tempore*[2] in London), wrote me the enclosed letter some time ago. Yesterday he called, but was not, of course, admitted, since I was allegedly absent. The devil of it is that, because of the OVEREND AFFAIR,[3] this fellow lives on his house rents; in addition, he will not accept bills of exchange. At other times the PRESSURE for the house has never been so IMMEDIATE, since I only owe him for 1 QUARTER. Lessner, too, is kicking me for THE REMAINDER OF MY DEBT, his wife is DESPERATELY SICK.

GENERALLY the SITUATION is bad.

Yesterday evening, on the CENTRAL COUNCIL[4] the ENGLISH TOO LATE but UNANIMOUSLY acknowledged that I h a d forecast literally for them, the, for me, HIGHLY AMUSING UPSHOT of the elections, with a criticism of the incorrect policy of the REFORM-LEAGUE.[5] The present HOUSE is the worst since the election under Pam's[6] command. The LONG PURSES have never had such an exclusive preponderance. E. Jones had boasted in too Lassallean a manner. At the last Sunday meeting of his congregation in CLEVELAND HALL, there was displayed a placard TO THIS EFFECT: FAREWELL TO THE GREAT ICONOCLAST, THE PEOPLES REDEEMER. LONG LlVE TO MR BRADLAUGH, THE DREAD NAUGHT OF ST STEPHEN'S![7]

In France things look very serious, according to Lafargue's last letters too. The government wants to force the lads on to the streets so that *chassepot*![8] and RIFLED CANNON may then laisser 'faire merveille'[9] Can you see any CHANCE of successful street conflicts? Defection of the army without a previous thrashing appears to me scarcely credible.

Biichner's clumsy work[10] is of interest to me in as much as it quotes most of the German research in the field of Darwinism — Prof. Jäger (Vienna) and Prof. Haeckel. According to them, the cell has been abandoned as the primaeval form; instead a formless but contractile particle of albumen is taken as STARTING POINT. This hypothesis was later confirmed by the discoveries in Canada (later also in Bavaria and SOME OTHER PLACES). The primaeval form must naturally be traced down to the point at which it may be produced chemically. And it appears that the way to this point has been found.

The conscientiousness with which Büchner has acquainted himself with the English stuff is also shown by the fact that he classifies Owen as one of Darwin's supporters.

Borkheim's letter to you,[11] which you sent me, I had the pleasure to have read to me for A SECOND TIME by him in person. This nincompoop now accuses Eichhoff of being a 'BUSYBODY'(!) and of 'writing long letters'. What self-knowledge!

Apropos the Irish elections, the only interesting POINT is Dungarvan, where Burry is presenting himself under the protection of the defector O'Donovan. (Ditto under the protection of the priest.) There is a GENERAL CRY against him amongst the Irish Nationalists since this blackguard, as government prosecutor during the first trial of the Fenians in Dublin, hurled such slanders (à la Constitutionnel against the June insurgents)[12] that even the London papers gave him a wigging.

Salut.

Your

K. M.

I believe Nincompoop[13] has gone to Bordeaux! Such a business trip is certainly necessary to cool his brain fever.