---
id: MECW43-096
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, October 24, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 October 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43, p. 142; First published: abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Berlin, 1931."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 24 October 1868**

Dear Fred,

Enclosed:

1. *Letter from Kugelmann.* Some interesting things in it. In any case, I shall write to tell him that I *forbid pour l'avenir* [for the future] all his eccentric respectful outbreaks **of esteem**.

2. *Letter from Liebknecht.* The brute seems quite mad. Weeks ago he wrote to me saying he would let me have **copies of** *Vogt.* And, as always with Liebknecht, there the matter rests. Not another word about it. A mass of stupid suggestions instead. I, he says, should reply to Faucher, since Liebknecht *cannot* answer him, and Faucher has **admirers** in several Leipzig tap-rooms. He will refrain 'for the present', and against his will, from attacks on Schweitzer. As if he had not, on the other hand, asked me, in his honour, kindly to attack Schweitzer 'for the present'. I am to place at his disposal a 'selection of choice passages' from Miquel's *private correspondence* with me, since he fancies that Miquel is 'dangerous'. I am to send him Freiligrath's poem against Kinkel, so he can rehabilitate Freiligrath at Kinkel's expense. Finally, I am to make a certain Stromeyer — (he means Strohn) — in Bradford the agent for Ernst Stehfest et Co., Crimmitschau (spinning and weaving partnership). **What else**? Luckily this time he has not done me the honour of asking me to *purchase* here, in the City, **English mustard specimens** for an alleged consumer society in Leipzig, and to *establish a 'connection*' *with the firm.* The **upshot** of the whole business was — in **return** for the **mustard** and the business information — the sentence: *The* **mustard** *is excellent!* This is in fact what the English economists call '**consumptive demand'** *par excellence.*

Borkheim's Russophobia (with which I inoculated him as the mildest sickness for the diversion of his superfluous vital spirits) is assuming dangerous dimensions; he now has a row with **Old** Philipp Becker, since the latter is on good terms with Bakunin and has written to Borkheim that he should not attack Bakunin in his letters. Borkheim regards this as a dangerous Muscovite conspiracy. He believes that his 'masterly invectives' in Wilhelm's *Wochenblatt* are causing Byzantium — and therefore also Bakunin — to shake. In a stern letter to Becker, he has declared with his usual delicacy that he will maintain his friendship for him and his (**by the by** negligible) pecuniary support, but — politics should now be excluded from their correspondence!

The 12 **ragamuffins** of the so-called **French Branch** held a **public meeting** in London last Tuesday, again under Pyat's chairmanship and with the reading of one of his melodramatic **puffs** for the revolution. There were big placards on the walls **as follows**:

*République Française*

*La Branche française de l'Association Internationale,* etc., etc. Then *Félix Pyat* in huge letters. The points for discussion, listed *in French,* included: 3. Vote d'adhésion au manifeste (the manifesto of the Commune de Paris, which exists only on the moon, which was to be read by Pyat and had been fabricated by him) et protestation, contre l'indifférence en matiere politique professée à Bruxelles au *dernier Congrès de l'Association Internationale.*

Under this, however, was the English notice (also distributed as a **handbill**): **Democrats of all nations are invited**, etc. '**For the purpose of deciding whether the Workingmen's International Association is to be a political Association.'**

Last Tuesday I was empowered to disavow the fellows immediately and publicly if the London daily newspapers should treat or mention this as a demonstration of ours. Luckily, **no notice was taken of them**.

This evening there is, however, to be a **Subcommittee** at which witnesses are to be heard that one of this dozen was formerly a *marchand d'hommes* [white-slave trader] and a brothel keeper, another a gambler, a third a spy for the **masters** in the **Tailors' strike** here, etc., etc. On the basis of the 'morals paragraph' of the Rules, these gentlemen will probably be kicked out. They are naturally doubly annoyed that all politics are left out in dealing with fellows like them.

*Salut* to **Mrs** Burns, Jollymayer and King Cole.

Your
K. M.