---
id: MECW43-231
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 27, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "27 July 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 27 July 1869

DEAR FRED,

Amongst the enclosed PAPERS, look at the *Vorbote* and especially what I marked on pp. 105, 106.

You will see that OLD Becker^a cannot give up making himself important.^409 With his *language group system* he casts aside our whole Rules and the spirit of the statute, and alters our organic system into an artificial construction of *arbitrary language relations* instead of *real state and national relations.* Extremely reactionary business, fitting for the pan-Slavists! And all this because we allowed *him provisionally* to remain the centre for his former correspondents, until the **International** in Germany *gets stronger.* I immediately put a spoke in his wheel when he attempted at the Eisenach Congress^371 to promote himself as centre for Germany.

Bebel has sent me 25 thalers for the Belgians from his Workers' Educational Association.[1] Today I ACKNOWLEDGED this gift, and took the opportunity to write to him about Becker's fantasy plans.

I drew his attention to *Article 6 of the Rules,*^b which only recognises *national central committees in direct contact* with the General Council and, where this is impossible because of the police, obliges the *local groups in each country* to correspond directly with the General Council. I explained to him the absurdity of Becker's pretensions and finally stated that if the Eisenach Congress—*quoad*^c THE *INTERNATIONAL*—accepted Becker's suggestion, *we* would immediately and publicly *quash* it as *contrary to the Rules.*

Incidentally Bebel and Liebknecht had written to me *earlier,* SPONTANEOUSLY, that *they* had written to Becker telling him they did *not* recognise him but corresponded directly with London.

Becker himself is not dangerous. But, as we have been informed from Switzerland, his secretary Remy was pressed upon him by Mr Bakunin and is Bakunin's TOOL. This Russian obviously wishes to become the dictator of the European workers' movement. He should be careful. Otherwise he will be officially excommunicated.

Your

Moor

As soon as I receive copies from Meissner I shall send them to my friends in Manchester and Charles Roesgen.

^a Johann Philipp Becker - ^b *Rules and Administrative Regulations of the International Working Men's Association* (see present edition, Vol. 20, pp. 441-46). - ^c regarding