---
id: MECW43-171
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 18, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "18 March 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in full for the first time"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

Manchester, 18 March 1869

Dear Moor,

I am writing to Meissner about the *Peasant War.*[2]

Even according to *Social-Demokrat* (which I'll send you back in a couple of days), Wilhelm[3] appears to have kept ahead in Saxony.[4] On the other hand, you have to grant the Lassalleans that they are developing quite a different sort of activity and know how to make ten times more out of the limited means than the People's Party does.[5] Even when Schweitzer was imprisoned, the *Social-Demokrat* did not publish such idiocies as Wilhelm does.

I wonder what Wilhelm will say about the fact that, in Celle the *Hanoverian particularists,* defeated in the first round of polling, voted in the second round for Planck, the *National-Liberal* Bismarckian, and thus got him into the Reichstag *instead* OF Yorck, the worker. But that does not matter to Wilhelm.

Huxley's famous article in the *Fortnightly*[6] in fact contains almost nothing except the joke about Comtism. The Comtists are said to be very furious about this, and intend to publish a thunderous reply, as a geological friend[7] in London writes to Moore.

What do you think of my suggestion about printing the articles from the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung*[8] *before *Bonaparte?[9] And about the French version?[10]

Many thanks for the Castille.[11] Only yesterday was I able to start reading it. Clearly a crypto-Bonapartist factional publication. However, it is enormous progress that the June insurrection is now generally seen for what it was.[12]

Tony Moilin[13] is really charming. This *homme de*^s 1869, who cheerfully declares that nobody should earn less than 2,400 fr.! I laughed myself half sick over this naïve doctor with extraordinary pretensions. If Lafargue were still to think anything of him, his wife would laugh at him.

I wanted to write to you about quite a long story, but can't recollect it at the moment. I have to go home now to hear what Gumpert has said about Lizzie, who has been in bed since Sunday.[14]

Your

F. E.