---
id: MECW43-128
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 12, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "12 December 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 3, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 12 December 1868[1]

DEAR FRED,

You will have seen that the ESTIMATE about COTTON relies on a comparison between exports and imports for 1862, 1863, and 1864. The *conclusion* regarding the *stocks of RAW COTTON* + *COTTON MANUFACTURES* (I believe I forgot the latter addition in the letter to you)[2] available in the *UNITED KINGDOM ON 1 JANUARY 1862* thus depends entirely on the correctness of the premisses. The data are based on the report by Messrs *ELLISON AND HAYWOOD.* The bare figures are as follows:

*Statistics of Cotton in the United Kingdom 1862, 1863, 1864*[3]

The arsenic works excellently. You know that, ABOUT 6 weeks ago, I felt something carbuncular and then re-started imbibing arsenic, and I am still at it. In fact, nothing has appeared except constant small preliminaries, which just as constantly disappear again. For years the business always began in October, and by January was in full bloom. Now it looks as though I shall escape it this year, and that only enough *traces* of the sickness reappeared and are reappearing as were necessary to induce me to take arsenic.

In his latest speech in Edinburgh, in which Huxley again took a more materialist stand than in recent years, he opened up another loophole for himself.[6] As long as we really observe and think, we can never escape materialism. But all this is reduced to the relationship between cause and effect, and 'your great compatriot Hume' has already proved that these categories have nothing in common with the things in themselves. *Ergo,* it is up to you to believe what you will. *Q.E.D. Salut.*

Your

K. M.