---
id: MECW43-180
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, April 6, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 April 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin 1931 Published in English in full for the first tim"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

Manchester, 6 April 1869

Dear Moor,

Liebknecht has again had the good luck of fools. The vote of 6,500 against 4,500 was a tremendous defeat for Schweitzer,[2] even if it was not a direct victory for Wilhelm. The *Kölner Zeitung* says that Schweitzer was frightfully dismayed, and though he had declared earlier that he would resign if any sort of considerable minority were to vote against him, he has taken a lot of care not to do so.[3]

In any case, Schweitzer's campaign for the kingdom of the tailors has failed, and his position in his own association has been shaken severely. *N'est pas dictateur qui veut.*[4] The process of the disintegration of specific Lassalleanism has thus begun, and is bound to continue rapidly. The figures 6,500:4,500 mean either a split or abandonment of the 'strict' organisation and Schweitzer's personal leadership. So far Liebknecht's foolhardiness has had a good effect. And under *these* circumstances I shall not take it amiss that he has let himself in for a new armistice,[5] although this is the third case between the two of them of 'cad's fighting, when ended, is very soon mended'.

The copies of *Zukunft* follow enclosed. Unfortunately, the Reichstag debate on industrial legislation is very poorly reported in them. There is nothing more comical than Schweitzer's lecture on the socialist demands, culminating in the declaration that he favours trades freedom[6] up to Wagener, Miquel et Co.[7]

Simply childish babble. Best by far was *Bebel.*

I am sending the B. Becker[8] to *Lessner* today. I hear that the latest *Fortnightly* has an article on it.[9]

I shall send you the *Zukunft* on Schweitzer and Liebknecht, and immediately if there is anything more in it; I assume that Liebknecht sent them a report straight away.

Your

F. E.