---
id: MECW43-329
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, May 8, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "8 May 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

Manchester, 8 May 1870

Dear Moor,

With his plot-comedy, Mr Pietri appears to me to have far overshot the mark. In the end the policemen don't even believe one another's buffoonery. It's really too fine. This scurvy Bonaparte has a fixed remedy for every sickness; in case of a plebiscite, the *populus* must be given a dose of assassination, just as every quack begins every bigger treatment with a strong laxative. I am longing to hear the result of the treatment; so far I know only about the Paris vote, which was so good that all forgeries by officials could not falsify it completely.[2]

The *Daily News* and *Observer* virtually announced that the English police had obtained the necessary and telegraphed it to the French police. With the FENIAN SCARE the English police have completely dropped their disguise and are baser than any other. NB. Do use thinner paper for your envelopes; I could open these thick envelopes without leaving a trace.

You really should publish in France and Germany the heroic deeds of the English police regarding the International and Flourens.[3]

10,000 COPIES=£40 is damned cheap; I would have expected *The Standard* to sell itself dearer. This manner of bribery has, however, long been common here.

Flerovsky[4] does not appear to have been confiscated; there are copies at least in Leipzig. My bookseller, the jackass, did not order the Russian text but a non-existent English translation. Hence the non-arrival.

So *Колокол* [Kolokol] will be even finer under Bakunin than it was under Herzen.[5]

Monsieur Wilhelm[6] is no longer to be borne. You will have seen that 'owing to the absence of the printer' (who is, thus, the real editor), the *Peasant War*[7] was printed in a mix-up that Grandperret could not have managed better and, at the same time, the dunderhead has the impudence to affix marginal notes that are complete nonsense, without any note as to authorship, and *everyone will ascribe them to me.* I have already forbidden him to do this once before, and he was piqued; but the nonsense is laid on so thick that it is no longer bearable. *Ad vocem*[8] Hegel, the fellow glosses: known to the general public as the discoverer (!) and glorifier (!!) of the royal Prussian *state concept* (!!!). I have retorted to him suitably, and have sent him, for publication, a declaration as mild as was possible under the circumstances. This dunderhead, who has been jogging around helplessly for years on the ridiculous contradiction between right and might, like an infantry man placed upon a horse with the staggers and locked in the riding-school—this ignoramus has the insolence to wish to dispatch a man like Hegel with the word 'Preuss'[9] and, at the same time, suggests to the public that I had said it. I have now had enough of the whole thing. If Wilhelm doesn't publish my declaration, I shall turn to his superiors, the 'Committee',[10] and if they also get up to tricks, I shall prohibit any further publication. I would rather not be published than let Wilhelm proclaim me a jackass thereby.[11]

Borkheim, returned enclosed. The fellow is gracious enough to wish to find Lever[12] jocose. 'Boquillon'[13] is very nice; I haven't yet read the other things.

I can tell you nothing about Schapper[14] that you do not know yourself or you could not get much better from Pfänder.

The *Kölnische Zeitung* has been gammoned into writing that the floor of the Atlantic Ocean is covered with protoplasm—'a moving slime that nourishes itself.'[15]

In LONDON CLAY, Owen has found the skull of a giant bird, similar to the great wingless birds of New Zealand.

The jolliest point about old Irish law[16] is the family law. Those must have been free-and-easy times. Polygamy existed, was at least *tolerated,* and the concubines here were divided into 6-7 classes, including one, the *imris,* 'WHOM HE (THE MAN) HAS WITH THE CONSENT OF HER HUSBAND'. Very naive, too, is the regulation about the disposition of property. If they both have the same amount, the husband and (the first or main) wife dispose of it jointly. If the husband has everything and the wife nothing, the husband disposes. Has the wife all and the husband nothing, then 'the wife takes the position of the husband, and the husband that of the wife'. Yet still more civilised than the modern English laws.

The legal position of *hommes entretenus*[17] is also defined. Best greetings.

Your

F. E.

Don't talk about grey hairs. They are growing thickly enough in my beard, but the corresponding *dignitas* simply won't appear.