---
id: MECW43-315
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, April 13, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "13 April 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913, and in full in *MEGA*, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in M"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 13 April 1870

Dear Moor,

Best thanks for the *parlamentaires.*[1] Some of them anticipated my wishes; others were new to me and very handy. I am sending you several numbers of *Zukunft* to give you an opportunity to admire the infinitely foul methods used by the National Liberals in the debate on political crimes (Criminal Code). This excels everything. The cowardly rogues believe they have performed such a deed of heroism with the abolition of the death sentence for *common* crimes—and that, too, only on paper—that political offenders may now be calmly imprisoned in convict jails and treated as COMMON CONVICTS.[2] For *political* crimes, powder and lead will continue to exist, through the agency of martial law.

Enclosed—a jolly letter from Wilhelm, which I request returned for the sake of answering. You will see that the fellow acts as though I were copying from *him.* He has not yet firmly established his Leipzig sheet,[3] and already wants to start a *daily* in Berlin.[4] The fellow always sees the heavens filled with melodious violins,[5] but the strings are missing and the sounding-board is smashed.

After various interruptions I am finally finished with Wakefield[6] —1600-1700 pages quarto.

The book is gruesomely written and still more gruesomely printed—nearly all figures and dates are wrong—but, as far as the material is concerned, unequalled in my practice. I have never before seen something so complete about a country. And the fellow has eyes and is fairly honest. The anxiety of the English concerning Ireland from 1808 to 1812 is priceless. Dispatches sent to India in which Lord W. Bentinck declared that Ireland was *lost* for England, were intercepted by the French and published.

It is striking 8 o'clock; I must run to catch the post. Best greetings.

Your

F. E.