---
id: MECW43-113
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, November 18, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "18 November 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913. Published in English in full for the first time in  Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43, p. 163"
status: raw
---

*To Marx in London*

**Manchester, 18 November 1868**

Dear Moor,

What do you say about the elections in the factory districts? The proletariat has once again made an awful fool of itself. Manchester and Salford return 3 Tories,[1] against 2 Liberals[2] including the **milk-and-water** Bazley, Bolton, Preston, Blackburn, etc., almost all Tories. In Ashton it looks as if Milner Gibson has gone **to the wall**. Ernest Jones **nowhere**, despite the **cheering**. Everywhere the proletariat are the **rag, tag and bobtail** of the official parties, and if any party has gained strength from the new **voters**, it is the Tories. The small towns, the **half rotten boroughs**[3] are the salvation of bourgeois Liberalism, and roles will be reversed: the Tories will favour more members for the big towns and the Liberals will favour unequal representation.

Here the electors have increased from 24,000 to not quite 48,000, and the Tories have increased their **voters** from 6,000 to 14-15,000. The Liberals have let slip a lot, and M. Henry did a lot of harm, but it cannot be denied that the increase in working-class **votes** has brought the Tories more than their simple percentage, and has improved their relative position. On the whole this is a good thing. As things look now, Gladstone should have a *narrow* majority and will be compelled to change the Reform Bill to stop the rolling stone; with a large majority, he would have let things take their course, as usual.

But it remains an appalling display of weakness by the English proletariat. *The parson* has shown unexpected power, and also the cringing before **respectability**. Not a single working-class candidate had **a ghost of a chance**, but **mylord Tom Noddy** or any parvenu snob could have the workers' votes with pleasure.

The howls of the Liberal bourgeois would amuse me very much were it not for this accompanying experience. To cheer myself up properly, yesterday I made Borchardt's son-in-law, who had dutifully drudged for the Liberals, as drunk as a lord.

Your
F. E.