---
id: MECW43-303
title: "Letter to Jenny Marx Longuet, March 17, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "17 March 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published in *Friedrich Engels. 1820-1970. Referate, Diskussionen, Dokumente,* Hanover 1971 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Wor"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JENNY MARX (DAUGHTER)

IN LONDON

Manchester, 17 March 1870

Dear Jenny,

I congratulate you on your well-earned success.[1] That Mr Bruce had to stammer his apologies in yesterday's *Daily News* is priceless.[2] It will now be necessary to show up the hollowness of these apologies, and that is not difficult. Here is some material, as I do not know whether you still have a copy of the *Pollock and Knox Report*[3] about THINGS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN.

Bruce says:

'WITH REFERENCE TO THE COMPLAINT THAT HE WAS COMPELLED TO BATHE IN UNCLEAR BATHS, THE COMMISSIONERS, AFTER FULL INQUIRY INTO THE PRACTICE OF THE PRISON, SAY "IT WOULD BE IDLE TO DWELL UPON SUCH ABSURDITIES."'

What do the Commissioners say? PAGE 23:

'AT BATHING HOURS, HE STOOD NO. 1 OF A PARTY OF 30, *HE WAS NOT CALLED FIRST TO THE BATH.* IT TURNED OUT THAT THE WARDER IN CHARGE ON ONE OCCASION BEGAN WITH NO. 1, NEXT WEEK WITH No. 30; THE 3RD WEEK HE TOOK No. 16 AND 17 FIRST

AND WORKED ROUND TO THE FLANKS *SO AS TO GIVE EACH HIS PRIORITY,* WITHOUT WHICH THERE WOULD HAVE BEEN UNIVERSAL DISCONTENT. *IT WOULD BE IDLE TO DWELL ON SUCH ABSURDITIES'*[4]

THUS, THE ABSURDITY does not consist in fact that it is stated that Rossa[5] had to bathe in the dirty water of criminals. No, but *in the fact that he complains about it.* Bruce changes the fact (admitted by the COMMISSIONERS) in such a way as if they had treated it 'as an absurdity'. That's the way Bruce treats the truth.

On the fact itself, the CONVICT of Clonmel explains (THINGS NOT

GENERALLY KNOWN, p. 9).

'IT IS NOT GENERALLY KNOWN THAT WE HAD TO BATHE IN THE SAME WATER IN WHICH SEVERAL OF THESE CRIMINALS BATHED OR WERE BATHING AT THE TIME.'

I might further remark that PENAL SERVITUDE is similar to the French *travaux forcés* or the so-called *galères,* and a CONVICT PRISON of this sort = the French *bagne,* and CONVICT = *galérien.* The enclosed clipping is a LEADER from the local John Blight's paper.[6] The *Manchester Guardian* also has a leader on the subject, aping that of yesterday's *Times,* but also with the comment that political prisoners have a claim to some CONSIDERATION.

Nota Bene: if you do not have the above report or the THINGS etc., I can send them to you immediately.

You should see the pleasure which this whole thing gave my wife. She is infinitely grateful to you for bringing all these infamies to light, and sends you the enclosed twig of SHAMROCK, for today is St Patrick's day and we don't know if you have any there.[7] There is also a SHAMROCK for Tussy.

Give my affectionate greetings to Moor, your Mama, Tussy and Ellen.

Your

F. Engels