---
id: MECW43-172
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 20, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "20 March 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in full for the first ti"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 20 March 1869

DEAR FRED,

We all hope that, in your next letter, you will be sending us better news about MRS Lizzie's state of health. Tussy especially asks you to extend our deepest sympathy to her. It's damned awful weather. Jennychen can't get rid of her cold, and for the past few days I have been cold-wild and cough-confused.

Next week (Friday or Saturday)[2] the children are going to Paris to the Lafargues. The business with Laura was this: she *had a fall* 2 or 3 weeks *before* her accouchement. As a result of this fall, she had to keep to her bed until 1-2 weeks ago and only with difficulty avoided danger.

I intend to have myself *naturalised* as an Englishman,[3] so I can travel to Paris safely. Without such a journey the French edition of my book[4] will never materialise. My presence there is absolutely necessary. Under Pahnerston's law you can, if you wish, slough off the Englishman again after 6 months. The law provides no protection for the naturalised person with regard to illegalities committed in his country of birth *before* naturalisation, if he should return to that country. With this exception, a naturalised person is on the same footing as any Englishman vis-à-vis foreign GOVERNMENTS. I really cannot see why I should not visit Paris *without the permission* of M. Bonaparte, if I have the means to do so.

My best thanks to Schorlemmer for the 2ND EDITION of *Chemie.*[5]

Tomorrow, as a Sunday recreation, I shall start re-reading the 2nd part, the organic chemistry (and assume that this is where the changes are to be sought).

As regards *Louis Bonaparte,* I am not in favour of printing the series from the *Revue* up to 1850 as an introduction.[6] On the one hand, I don't wish to give Meissner new excuses for delay. On the other, it would be very easy, by patching in FACTS that emerged later, to revise this section, but there is no hurry. In Brussels, De Paepe has sought in vain for a French publisher for *Louis Bonaparte.* For such operations, these gentlemen demand *money* from the author.

Blanqui, *who is now in Paris,* made very good jokes at Lafargue's about Moilin's real QUACK NOSTRUM. France, he said, is always ungrateful to its great men. Moilin, for instance, has solved the problem of the century in an unprecedentedly simple manner—and Paris goes about its business as though nothing had happened.

*Castille* was a June insurgent, was transported as such to Cayenne, and returned after the general amnesty. He wrote the first edition of his book[7] *de bonne foi.*[8] In the meantime, the government bought him, and staged this second edition as the antithesis to Ténot's writings. The changes made are: 1. the tone has become more bourgeois, sometimes smart-alecky. 2. Passages against the men of December[9] have been removed. 3. A few quietly apologetic phrases for Bonaparte have been patched in. Despite all this, the *fonds*[10] unchanged, and it remains as you say, a very satisfactory work. It is a very good thing when M. Bonaparte pushes back the writing of history to the period before 2 December. The struggle of the various parties, their mutual: *Et tu Brute!*[11] will help put a stop to the 'revolutionism' of the old scoundrels of 1848 and earlier.

I sent to Beesly, by city post, WITH A FEW RANDOM NOTES for him to read, Vermorel's pamphlet[12] that I also sent you (with the Castille). He sent it back to me with the *enclosed* note, which is as stupid as it is MAGISTERIAL and arrogant. It appears to me that positive philosophy may be equated with ignorance about everything positive. The other sheet enclosed was sent me by Borkheim for my 'DUTCH RELATIONS'.[13]

Yesterday I found the report on the 'miners' guilds',[14] printed in full in the *Social-Demokrat* of last Wednesday. Whether the *Zukunft* has taken it I do not know.[15] Possibly the report does not stand at that lofty stage of wisdom that alone can satisfy social policy. I have not yet received Wilhelm for this week[16]

Apropos. In the very near future there will be a demonstration here for E. Jones. The business is sponsored by the Clerkenwell branch of the *quondam* REFORM LEAGUE.[17] Their leaders, Weston, Lucraft, etc. are MEMBERS of our GENERAL COUNCIL. The festival committee offered me one of the 5 presidential chairs in Trafalgar Square, from which the masses are to be harangued. I refused the courtesy very politely. What I could not refuse, however, was to promise a small contribution to the demonstration costs ON BEHALF OF MYSELF AND FRIENDS. It must be paid Tuesday NEXT[18] If you and Moore want to take a share, it must be done by then. *Addio.*

Your

Moor

who every day resembles more a 'white' washed Moor.