---
id: MECW43-287
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, February 11, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 February 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

Manchester, 11 February 1870

Dear Moor,

Your tonsil business, following the abscess in your auxiliary gland, doesn't make me very happy. In any case, it shows that something is not quite kosher about your lymphatic system. If the business does not clear up soon, I would ask Allen, who made such a correct prognosis about my glandular business. Yours, however, is obviously chronic, whilst mine was extremely acute; but better is better.

I am sending you, enclosed, what I've written for Liebknecht[2] as an introduction to the *Peasant War*. Since, in this connection, it is not possible to steer clear of the year 1866, which has hitherto been avoided, we shall have to reach an agreement on what to say about it. Other remarks would also be welcome.

Further, Wilhelmchen's reply.[3] Totally Wilhelm. He didn't *know* at all that the *18th Brumaire* had been published. On the other hand, I should *immediately* send him my address. Since *he* had no longer sent me his sheet, his excuse is that I must have left my address. And now this penance—belatedly throwing the whole *Volksstaat* from 1 October onwards at my head!

I would ask for the earliest return of these two documents, so I might send Wilhelmchen what he wants and have him leave me in peace.

Today I returned to you, per Globe Parcel Co., all copies of *Cloche, Lanterne, Marseillaise, Figaro, etc.* that I had here. The relevant number of *Cloche* is among them.;[4] Since Jennychen collects these things, it is best if she has them all together. I have only kept one *Marseillaise* here, containing the business about the guncotton[5] I wish to examine Chlormeier[6] further about it.

Dakyns wanted to visit you before Christmas, and wrote to Moore for your address. He, whose insight into character and sense of judgement is not, however, always unexceptionable, gave him such a picture of your inaccessibility at home that I said immediately that poor Dakyns would be quite unnecessarily intimidated. So I wanted to give you Dakyns' address last time, but forgot; but I told Moore immediately that he should not put such nonsense into Dakyns' head.

The sentence quoted from Flerovsky[7] is the first Russian sentence I have understood *completely* without a dictionary. What is the Russian title of the book? I shall acquire it for myself. What I wanted to send you was not *Herzen,* but the German translation of *Земля и воля, Land and Freedom,* by the aristocrat *Lilienfeld,*[8] which also describes the bad results of freedom for the peasants, and the resulting decay of agriculture.[9] I wrote to you about this more than a year ago,[10] and since then Borkheim has also acquired it and, I believe, translated passages from it for you. As soon as I have read it through, I'll send you it.

Ferret's letter[11] also returned, enclosed. It's a good thing Bakunin has gone to Tessin. He won't create much trouble there, and it proves the business in Geneva is over. Since there are simply such ambitious vain incompetents in every movement, it is *au fond*[12] good that they join together in their own way, and after that move into the public eye with their cosmic whimsies. Then it soon becomes possible to demonstrate to the world that it is all gas. And this is better than if the struggle stays in the field of private gossip, in which people who have something to do are never a match for those who have the whole day for forming cliques. But an eye must be kept on the fellows, so they do not manage to occupy the field somewhere or another without resistance. Spain and Italy will have to be left to them, of course, at least for the time being.

It would be a very good thing if Mr Rochefort, or as Lizzie says RUSHFORTH, were to go missing in prison for a while.![13] The *petite presse* is quite a good thing, but when it supplants everything else I lose my taste for it. It still has in its bones the whole quality of its origins in the *bas-empire*[14] And when Rochefort preaches unity of the bourgeois and the worker, it is even funny. On the other hand, the 'serious' leaders of the movement are, for their part, really comically serious. It is truly marvellous. The SUPPLY of *heads,* which, until '48 the proletariat obtained from other classes, appears to have dried up completely, and in all countries. The workers seem to be increasingly constrained to do it *themselves.*

What is *l'illustre* Gaudissart[15] up to? I hear and see nothing of him. Hasn't he got any business again yet?

Best greetings.

Your

F. E.