---
id: MECW43-187
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, April 16, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 April 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "Extract published in *Marx Engels on Literature and Art*, Progress Publishers, 1976; First published in part in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in"
status: raw
---

*To Marx in London*

**Manchester, April 16, 1869**

Dear Moor,

Enclosed returned the 2 Ludlows[1] and the 2 'knavish tricks'.[2] From Wilhelm you sent only the few lines for me, not those to you to which you refer.[3] If Wilhelm can't d o more than this, t h en it is a miracle he did not d o even worse in Barmen.[4] In a few days I shall send you reports in *Zukunft* about the general assembly[5] which appeared very late and show that the ground had already been well prepared in Schweitzer's association, and that the rebellion would have broken out even without Wilhelm.

The Ludlow correspondence very useful.

Many thanks for the Rameau[6] which will give me much pleasure. At the moment I am reading almost nothing, in order finally to get my eye back on the right track; I have also cut down on my work at the office.

Wilhelm is badly mistaken if he thinks I would send him the Peasant War[7] on the basis of such vague promises, so he could subsequently pop up and yell that, if I did not send the sum of umpteen pounds, it would be impossible to print the final sheets. His letter is real twaddle, and his calm assumption that you should pay his fees is impudent.

Fowler, the STIPENDIARY MAGISTRATE here, who had the Fenians brought into court shackled to one another, has relinquished his post. Leaving behind his wife and 2 children, he has eloped with the wife of Milne, the CHAIRMAN OF QUARTER SESSIONS (daughter of the late Brooks, the rich BANKER, and WORTH £80,000 IN HER OWN RIGHT), who, for her part, left 5 children with her beloved husband. Great consternation amongst the philistines.

*Salut*.

Your

F. E.

This final story can only be explained etymologically; Fowler from Fowl ≈ Vogel.[8]