---
id: MECW43-034
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, June 27, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "27 June 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 27 June 1868

DEAR FRED,

£5 received with THANKS. The children are getting along *very well.* The suppuration and swelling of the throat has improved so much that today the doctor prescribed a hearty DINNER for them (hitherto they had only port and Liebig)[1]. They consumed the DINNER with ZEST. From the beginning Korklow prescribed *air.* Instead of the CHLORIDE OF LIME another (newer) disinfectant, since he regards the former as injurious to the lungs. Luckily our house is built in such a way, and in particular the children's rooms are so situated, that they are plentifully provided with ventilation coming from every side.

Tell MRS LIZZY (TO WHOM TUSSY SENDS HER LOVE) that Manchester was not for a moment held responsible here. SCARLATINA and MEASLES are now epidemic in London. Tussy probably CAUGHT THE INFECTION FROM THE DAUGHTER OF PROFESSOR FRANKLAND. Best greetings to Lizzy from me.

Your

Moor

Today I received a curious document. I have been summoned to appear next Wednesday before the VESTRY of St. Pancras TO SHOW CAUSE WHY MY GOODS AND CHATTELS SHOULD NOT BE DISTRAINED. For the accursed VESTRY elected me *bon gré mal gré*[2] as 'CONSTABLE OF THE VESTRY OF ST. PANCRAS', and I went to Manchester[3] instead of taking over the office and swearing the appropriate oath of office. Dr Korklow, to whom I showed the SUMMONS today, said that it WAS AN HONOUR MUCH VALUED BY THE PHILISTINES OF ST. PANCRAS. I SHOULD TELL THEM THAT I WAS A FOREIGNER AND THAT THEY SHOULD KISS ME ON THE ARSE.