---
id: MECW43-083
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, October 2, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "2 October 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

Manchester, 2 October 1868

Dear Moor,

Borkheim has done his business excellently. At the end of last month the sum of £72 was due for wine which Charles,[2] Gumpert and I had received from him. It was only at the beginning of this month, however, that I could lay my hands on the cash. So I sent it to him yesterday and asked whether he knew how to raise £100 for you or whether he could leave the wine unpaid until February. He agreed to the latter and advanced the other £28 himself. So we have, I think, peace and quiet at least for the immediate future.

But now you must get on with the 2nd volume,[3] and give your liver some exercise.

The Spanish business 165 has gone brilliantly so far. The 'dynasty' had already been wrecked in the vagina of the Innocent Lady.[4] So the minimum consequence: a change in dynasty and an elected king, plus a constituent assembly. All very nice things, even in themselves, on MR Bonaparte's frontier. It may get better yet.

Schweitzeriana[5] back this evening, forgotten yesterday by mistake. His manner of establishing a few nice little posts for life for himself and Fritzsche is priceless. But the whole story is impracticable. In the 'Union' 3 independent powers of different origin! 1. The committee, elected by the *trades.* 2. The presidium, elected by a general vote. 3. The congress, elected by the *local organisations.* This means collisions everywhere, and that is supposed to make for 'rapid action'. To be sure, the *elû du suffrage universel,*[6] as everybody's trusted agent, is in the best position. Childish of Lassalle to have taken over these idiocies from the French Constitution,[7] and of Schweitzer to treat them as eternal models to be used everywhere.[8] However it may be, the whole business will get nowhere so long as only the Lassalleans are in it, and as soon as others participate, too, the stuff will come to an end.

Have to catch the last post.

Your

F. E.

Enclosed the ceremonial RECEIPT which the illustrious Gaudissart[9] has accepted from you to prove that he is a serious businessman.