---
id: MECW43-021
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, May 22, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "22 May 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 22 May 1868

Dear Moor,

Schorlemmer had told me about *one* carbuncle, but two *a tempo,*[1] and in addition in that place where, it is true, everything exists in pairs, *c'est vraiment trop*[2] I hope they have gone, and that the arsenic will hold back further ones.

I shall send you the money for the bill. Have you heard anything from Meissner? If not, the time would have come to ask how sales have been going; on this point he owes you an accounting after the Easter Fair as *associé* in the business. Then you could also refer to the *advertisement* asked for by Meissner,^8 the man is still waiting for a reply from me.

The *Fortnightly* article[3] will thus be written as though by an *Englishman*—that is how I understand you. Incidentally, I still cannot get past the beginning. It is damned difficult to make clear the dialectical method to the English who read the reviews, and I surely cannot approach the crowd with the equations *C*— *M*— C, etc.

Did my last letter give you the data you need?[4] If not, formulate your questions and I shall see what can be done.

Schorlemmer says that you spoke of coming here soon, which would be very desirable. The change of air will do you more good than anything else. This week and the beginning of next our house is in a revolution because of CLEANING AND WHITEWASHING, but if you can come at the end of next week, that would be very nice; you know that in the Whit week I always have plenty of time to spare. Don't forget that you promised to bring Tussy with you.

Eichhoff has finally terminated his lectures on crises.[5] As was to be expected, the mortgage crisis in Berlin was the core and finale of the whole thing. But the poor devil appears finally to have bored even the reporter of the *Zukunft* so much that he only reported on it quite briefly and incomprehensibly.[6]

Liebknecht has this time committed great folly. First he has completely identified himself with the South German federalists, ultramontanes, etc., by signing their protest,[7] and always votes with them, and in addition has so lost all fruitfulness in his speechifying that the impertinent Lasker could tell him—and rightly so—that he was making the same speech once again which he had delivered for weeks past in all popular meetings.[8] The cunning Schweitzer, who confines himself simply to workers' representation, has quite overshadowed him.

The rag,[9] too, as you will have seen, is achieving the impossible: it is getting even more stupid.

Enclosed Borkheim returned.

Your

F. E.