---
id: MECW43-115
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 23, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 November 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 23 November 1868

DEAR FRED,

The FIRST HALF arrived this morning. Enclosed 2 letters, ONE from Collet and the other from Jones. As regards *Collet,* I have burnt my fingers with these blasted *Urquhartites*.[1] You know—at least I think I wrote to you about it—that, purely for the joy of MISCHIEFMONGERING, I set new bees in their bonnets about the Peel Act of 1844 2 2 3 and its useful effect for Russia. (Incidentally the matter is correct WITHIN CERTAIN LIMITS.) Now Urquhart wants to print one of these letters *over my name* in his NEXT *Diplomatic Review.*[2]

If I refused 'my name', I would make them mistrustful. So I am IN FOR IT. It is a consolation that not a soul reads the *Diplomatic Review* (EXCEPT A SMALL CLIQUE). The Urquhartites, however, are burning their fingers too. In order to give the affair more weight, they obviously intend to cite me as the author of *Capital,* which would be AN ABOMINATION in their eyes if they knew it.

As regards Ernest Jones, I find him EXCEEDINGLY COOL. / should act for him as ELECTIONEERING AGENT (for Greenwich)! I have replied 84 that I see not a GHOST OF A CHANCE for him: 1. Baxter Langley is the local candidate, and neither Mill nor Beales COULD STAND *without* his PERMISSION. 2. The GENERAL COUNCIL of the 'International' does not get mixed up in ELECTIONEERING. In no case could we act *against* B. Langley because—and this is a fact—since the Brussels Congress 1 3 8 B. Langley and his SUNDAY LEACUE[3] have concluded an amicable agreement with us. (In fact, our sessions take place in *their* hall.)

3. He (Jones) is at present *unpopular* in London (and this is true). *Reynolds's* ARTICLES: 'TRAITORS IN THE CAMP', etc., had damaged him.[4]

I have just received the enclosed letter from the secretary[5] of the Workers' Educational Society here. 6 7 This shows that the Lassalleans imported from Paris and Germany, who maintain secret contacts with Schweitzer, have made use of Lessner's absence due to his wife's sickness in order fraudulently to obtain from here a vote of confidence for *Schweitzer* against the Nurembergers. 1 3 5 As a well-known member of the Society, I would be made responsible for this—and this appears to me to be the aim of the whole operation. Thus I am writing to Speyer without delay explaining the reasons that, under these circumstances, I must announce my *resignation* from the Society.[6]

Your

K. M.