---
id: MECW43-070
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, September 16, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 September 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

Manchester, 16 September 1868

Dear Moor,

I can only write briefly and badly, I have rheumatism in my right hand and have been writing all the afternoon.

Enclosed a ten-pound note. When Borkheim returns, you absolutely must force him to undertake some sort of coup, if nothing else can be done. You will understand that I myself find things rather tight at the moment. Did you ever write to *Meissner* asking for a settling of accounts? With the workers bombarding from all sides now, the burking will soon come to an end, and the second edition[2] will not have to be awaited for long. *Now is the time* to insert a new advertisement for the book. Think one out, I shall send it to Meissner, whom I owe an answer anyway. But don't put it off. Furthermore, Meissner should be sent *The Times* with the resolution of the Germans in Brussels, the *Demokratisches Wochenblatt* of yesterday,[3] etc., the man must be kept happy. If you have not done it, do it (I can no longer get that No. of *The Times* here). And then the exchange value, too, will gradually come into effect for you.

The things in *The Times* in Eccarius' report[4] will be a big help to you here, and MR Morley will be amazed.[5] The papers here also carry fairly full extracts from the report (but most in *The Daily News).*

The congress went well after all. The method of conducting the babble in public and the BUSINESS on the quiet has worked splendidly. So, the COUNCIL will remain in London, and once again the Proudhonists have only the satisfaction of having resolved that *they* are Proudhonists, and nobody else is.

One might also send Meissner the No. of the *Zukunft* about Lloyd, etc., in which you are mentioned twice. I can do all this, if you want.

Moses Hess amused me greatly.[6]

But the question now arises: Has not a popular short presentation of the content of your book *for workers* become an urgent necessity? If it is not written, some Moses or other will come along and do it and botch it up. What do you think of it?

Enclosed also Eichhoff back.[7]

It is impossible to leave without stupidities being committed. While I was away,[8] the fellows on the *comité* of the Schiller Institute,[9] acting on the suggestion of the Bradfordians, invited that swine Vogt to give a lecture here. I naturally announced my resignation at once, 'in order not to give an indirect vote of confidence to a man who, I considered it proved, was a paid Bonapartist agent in 1859'.[10] The swine is coming tomorrow.

Your

F. E.