---
id: MECW43-074
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, September 21, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "21 September 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 21 September 1868

Dear Moor,

Enclosed returned the Schweitzer stuff.[1] The man is an idiot to believe that he can bribe you with such a letter. In making you chief of 'Europe' in general, he hints delicately that your kingdom is, for this very reason, not in any country in particular, i.e., strictly speaking, not of this world. He appoints you Pope so that you may anoint him Kaiser of Germany, and thus give a kick to Wilhelm.[2] In any case, it is worth much that you have *this* letter in your hands.

I think you should, above all, point out to the philistine that his workers' congress[3] only makes sense if it is a *genuine* workers' congress, not merely a feeble imitation of his Hamburg congress; i.e. if Schweitzer sees to it that non-Lassallean elements are also represented. So far, there is no sign of this, and Schweitzer does not appear to have taken any steps in this direction. Whether he 'can make friends' with Wilhelm and others or not, is completely immaterial; in a matter like this he must go along with them. Then, regarding the statutes, you could write to him that what counts is less what is in them than how they are handled.

The fellow obviously wishes to push out Wilhelmchen, Bebel and consorts, and be able to appeal to something in writing from you for this purpose. That must be very important to him, otherwise he would never have written you this letter, which delivers him absolutely into your hands for ever. You are quite right that he sees that a few Lassallean phrases will no longer do and that he must expand.

If I am not mistaken you also gave Wilhelmchen copies of the *18th Brumaire.*^h Some of them should be brought here, I no longer have a copy.

I shall write to Gaudissart.[4]

The Spanish business[5] could end all the war clamour. *La innocente Isabel*[6] was the only reliable ally that Louis[7] had, and if a revolution should be victorious in Spain, the whole constellation will assume a different character. The affair will probably be decided very quickly; I believe the Innocent Lady is *foutue.*[8]

Your

F. E.