---
id: MECW43-073
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 19, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "19 September 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 19 September 1868

DEAR FRED,

Enclosed a letter from Schweitzer,[1] ditto one from Essen and also 6 numbers of the *Social-Demokrat.* I must have all this stuff back by *Tuesday*^a What answer should I give the cunning Schweitzer? You will see from the debates of the *General Association of German Workers congress*[2] (in the *Social-Demokrat)* that the 'true-blue' Lassalleans smelt that their president was leaving Lassalle's course in proposing a congress for the establishment of TRADES UNIONS and settlement of STRIKES.[3] He only received permission to launch this agitation independently of the Association of German Workers by threatening to resign. His purpose, of course, is to get in ahead of Liebknecht, etc. He was also aware that, with the development of a *real* workers' organisation in Germany based on TRADES UNIONS, his artificial sectarian Association WOULD SOON BE NOWHERE. What he now describes in a LEADER (No. 104)^b as the summa of Lassalle's discoveries: 'state credit for the foundation of productive associations', is literally copied from the programme of French *Catholic* socialism, *duce*^c Bûchez, in the *Atelier* at the time of Louis Philippe.[4] I must answer diplomatically and would like to know your view.

*Vogt* is no longer available here.^a But yesterday I wrote to Liebknecht and categorically requested information about the copies (perhaps 150) sent to him.[5]

Next Tuesday^b at the first session of the GENERAL COUNCIL there will be stormy weather. Dupont is also furious about Eccarius because he took as good as no part in the congress.[6] I shall try to protect Eccarius against 'positive' measures,^c but this time I shall not be able to take sides for him so strongly as I did last year against Fox, Carter, etc.[7]

A *Bordelaise*^d merchant, friend of Lafargue, English-speaking, passed through here after a journey through Sweden and Denmark. He told Lafargue that in higher circles there they speak much about my book^e which does not sound very likely to me.

Laurachen is somewhat better. Her SUFFERINGS are connected with certain natural processes of development. They want to leave at the beginning of October, and this is awkward because the linen part of the trousseau is still incomplete.

*L'illustre* Gaudissart^f returned today. The loan was like this: You borrow money FOR A CERTAIN TERM. If you die before maturity, the sum need *not* be paid back. On the other hand, in the contrary case repayment must be made on the date of maturity with the STIPULATED interest. The transaction is then *at an end.* It is thus no life insurance. You do not receive a policy, but the money, for which you make out a BOND. This was naturally returned to me. It is the peculiar form that makes the whole business so expensive — certainly the worst and the dearest way to borrow money.

The sole circumstance which would, in my opinion, favour Bonaparte in a belated campaign is that Russia would then be more paralysed, at least for military action. One thing is certain. The whole of France believes that war is IMMINENT.

As for the advertisement, I shall *d'abord*^g see what Meissner answers. I have asked him about it.^h

How did things go with fat Vogt?^i

*Salut.*

Your

K. M.

The report on the Brussels Congress in the *Opinion nationale* states, inter alia:

'Je dois mentionner ici le rapport général de l'Association, rédigé par le conseil de Londres. *Mentionner,* c'est bien le seul mot que je puisse employer, car, je ne suis point assez fort légiste pour trier et élaguer les phrases incriminables par les lois de France, et il s'en pourrait trouver quelques-unes de ce genre.'^a

Speaks then of the PASSAGES dealing with '*le gouvernement français'.*

'La critique y est verte parfois, et souvent ironique. Je le répète, je ne puis m'en faire juge; mais je dois avouer que le public a été moins timide que votre correspondant; il a couvert d'applaudissements frénétiques tous les passages que je m'abstiens de citer.'^b

There were 12 REPORTERS from France there. The *Emancipation*^c and the *Journal de Bruxelles*^d attacked the congress in exactly the same way as they attacked us 20 years ago.

One Russian was there as a journalist. He said he would send the General Council the Russian papers that wrote about the congress.

a Marx means his book *Herr Vogt.* - b 22 September - c See this volume, pp. 101-02. - d man from Bordeaux - e the first volume of *Capital* - f Sigismund Borkheim - g first - h See this volume, p. 102. - i Ibid., p. 100.

a 'I must mention here the general report of the Association, drafted by the Council in London. *Mention* is in fact the only word which I can use since I am not sufficiently qualified in law to identify and weed out the phrases punishable under French law, and there could well be some of this sort in it' (from J. I. Blanc's report on the Brussels Congress of the International Working Men's Association in *L'Opinion nationale,* 10 September 1868). - b 'The criticism here is sometimes sharp and often ironical. I repeat I cannot make a judgment; but I must admit that the audience was less timid than your correspondent; it received with frantic applause all those passages which I refrain from quoting' (ibid). - c *L'Emancipation belge,* No. 254, 10 September 1868, leading article. - d *Journal de Bruxelles,* Nos 252, 254-260; 8, 10-16 September 1868.