---
id: MECW43-253
title: "Letter to Paul and Laura Lafargue, October 18, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "18 October 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published in *Annali dell'Istituto G. G. Feltrinelli,* an. 1, Milano, 1958 Reproduced from the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO PAUL AND LAURA LAFARGUE

IN PARIS

London, 18 October 1869

My dear Paul and Laura,

I send you to-day the manuscript of Mr Keller.[1] I cannot find his address. So you must through the aid of Schily get it out from M. Hess.

Tell Mr Keller that he shall go on. On the whole, I am satisfied with his translation, although it lacks elegance and is done in too negligent a way.

He will do best to send me every chapter *through you.* As to chapter IV I shall subdivide it.[2]

The changes I have made in this chapter II need not be maintained, but they show the direction in which I want the corrections to be made.

As to the word **Verwertung**[3] see my note p. 12 of his manuscript. He must make a note on it for the French reader.

I doubt whether the frequent *large printing of words* will do for French printers.

In German we use the word 'Process' (procès) for economical movements, as you say chemical procès, *si je ne me trompe pas.*[4] He translates by 'phenomena' which is nonsense. If he can find no other word, he must always translate by 'mouvement' or something analogous.

Kiss dear Schnappy on my behalf.

Yours

Old Nick

I have received a letter from St Petersbourg. A Russian sends me his work (in German)[5] on the situation of the peasantry and the working class generally in that benighted country.[6]

[In Lafargue's handwriting]

Faire remarquer à Keller que les mots pointillés sont maintenus dans le texte.[7]