---
id: MECW43-116
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, November 23, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "23 November 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English in Marx-Engels Collected"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

V/J 71 968—Manchester, 7 January 1868 £10. T/N 14 065—London, 26 February 1868 *£10.* Second halves. First sent with preceding post.

[Manchester,] 23 November 1868

Dear Moor,

I can send you the above only today, but give you the good news that, after a conversation today with Calico Gottfried[1] it will *probably* be possible to prolong the contract with him for a few years.[2] I intend, if all goes well, to take 3 years, the last of which would be without any obligation on my part to work. If all this is successful, which must be more or less decided by the end of February at the latest, we are over the hill, and I shall be able without difficulty to pay off the £100 debt you still have, and in general to establish the affair properly and on a solid basis, so that this load of debts will not return, at least for the period of the contract.

Lizzie suddenly became very unwell yesterday; I thought at first it was serious, but she has slept a lot, so is now much better. She had congestions to the head. Tussy's letter gave her much pleasure, and as soon as she is better again she will answer it.

The wonderful primeval mass of the respected Büchner is still a great mystery to me. Couldn't you send us the book[3] here some time?

That damned Schweitzer is still too my eyes.

How about Ténot, *Paris, le 2 décembre*? Best greetings.

Your

F. E.