---
id: MECW43-274
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, December 16, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "16 December 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "Printed according to the original. Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX[1]

IN LONDON

Manchester, 16 December 1869

Dear Moor,

Enclosed—the desired remittance. This time I have been able to make it one hundred pounds, since a minor error to my[2][3] disadvantage was found in the last accounts, and Sir Godfrey[4] had to make it good to me subsequently—IT WILL COME IN FOR CHRISTMAS.

That damned Giraldus Cambrensis dances before me like a will-o'-the-wisp. I must get the fellow, since he is the first foreign, that is to say first authentic, source on the state of Ireland on the arrival of the English, and the quotations I have seen lead me to believe that I shall find something more. The book, called *Hibernia expugnata,*;[5] is nowhere to be found, but the first part, which interests me, is in the *Frankfurt* (!) edition of Camden's *Britannia?* I don't know whether in another edition. This edition is naturally *not* here; an English edition in the FREE LIBRARY does not contain Giraldus[6] the third volume of another edition in the lending library which *might* contain it is lost, and thus my only hope is the Chetham LIBRARY,[7] to which I shall go tomorrow. Incidentally, this hunt for sources is quite a different sort of pleasure than it was to hunt for customers on the blasted stock exchange.

Are Petty's *Political Anatomy of Ireland* and *Political Survey of Ireland* two different works, or only different editions? For the latter is here.

I have here a later edition of Kane's book; the one from you is unfortunately of little use because of its age (1846).[8]

I am making a written record of each period as soon as I have fairly finished my studies. Then you have the interrelations more clearly in your head and, altogether, a more vivid idea of the business, and can still make corrections. That is why, on the whole, I am keeping so strictly to the historic periods in arranging the order in which I plough through sources. I am nearly finished up to 1600.

On the side, I am reading *Grant's CAMPAIGN AGAINST Richmond* by Cannon.[9] Grant is a self-willed jackass who had so little confidence in himself and his army that he never dared undertake the simplest flanking manoeuvre against Lee, who was weaker by half, before he had weakened him by several days of frontal attack and had nailed him down in his original position. He relied upon the simple calculation that if he lost three men for every one of Lee's, then Lee would run out of people before he did. Nowhere else have there been such brutal butcheries as on that occasion. It was[10] the day-long skirmishes in the forests that cost so many lives; the wooded terrain made detours very difficult, and this is Grant's only excuse.

Best greetings to the LADIES.

Your

F. E.