---
id: MECW43-279
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 22, 1870"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "22 January 1870"
year: 1870
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA*, Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 January 1870

DEAR FRED,

I am only writing you THESE FEW LINES today, since my left arm is under bandages and POULTICES, that is to say, not under my command.

The business was an ABSCESS connected with the GLANDS. In addition, a few other little things, which were put in order yesterday by being lanced. Today, everything in best progress; the doctor was fully satisfied.

The port, which arrived yesterday, is doing me a great service. You should not imagine that I have learned so much Russian IN A FEW WEEKS; I won't say as much as you have forgotten, but as much as would remain to you had you forgotten three times as much. I am still a beginner.

So Herzen is dead. Just about time I finished *TwpbMa* etc.[1]

Plenty of things have happened in the 'International', especially with regard to Bakunin's intrigues.[2] But too long to write about now.

The Paris MOVEMENTS are amusing.[3] Since Ollivier is also a FREE TRADER, he is naturally a man after the heart of the English philistine, who always forgets that what suits him must be, *prima facie,*^h DISGUSTING to French Frenchmen.

MY COMPLIMENTS TO MRS Lizzie AND ALL OF THEM.

Your

Moor

What do you say to the clever-clever stuff in *Zukunft,* by means of which they attempt to push themselves out of the purely political camp!

Apropos. I still have a little note from Liebknecht[4] which arrived for you during your absence from England. But I can't look it out now amongst the mess of papers. Next time.