---
id: MECW43-147
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 28, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "28 January 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931. Printed according to the original. Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 28 January 1869

DEAR FRED,

The news about E. Jones naturally caused deep dismay in our household, since he was one of our few old friends.

I am sending you 1 *Vorbote* and a small pamphlet I received today from Berlin. The author, who sent it, describes himself on the envelope as a university lecturer in agricultural management.

Jennychen's cough has nearly disappeared. In the past few days I have had another bad attack, but today the business appears to me to have changed into a running cold, and thus be coming to an end.

Liebknecht writes to me that, in Switzerland and Germany, revolts are pending against Becker (OUR OLD ONE)[1] and that a public scandal can only be avoided if Becker breaks with Bakunin and abandons his dictatorial behaviour. People are very dissatisfied with his financial management, and his reports on it. Liebknecht wishes me to write *privatim* to Becker, since he is very STUBBORN. But the business is tricky. Wilhelm will go to Vienna in May. The last fifty copies of *Herr Vogt* have been deposited with Kugelmann, on my instructions.

The Gurney affair[2] AMUSES me immensely. I have studied this damned CASE in all the DETAILS, SO I found nothing new in the PROCEEDINGS in Mansion House,[3] EXCEPT GREAT Edwards.[4]

You must notify me several days in advance when you are coming here, so I can invite Prof. Beesly for *one* evening.

*Salut.*

Your

Karlo Moro[5]