---
id: MECW43-140
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 1, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "1 January 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 1 January 1869

DEAR FRED,

HAPPY NEW YEAR! From the enclosed letter from Lafargue you will see that I have received a special NEW YEARS GIFT—THE DIGNITY OF GRANDFATHER.[1]

From the attached 2 numbers printed *in Paris*—*Cloche* and *Diable à quatre*—you can see what an arrogant tone prevails there. It should be compared to the language used by the opposition in Prussia! This *petite presse*[2] —and its men included even Rochefort—was the Bonaparte regime's very own product. Now it is the most dangerous weapon against it.

From the enclosed issues of the *Vorbote*[3] you can learn about the scandal in Basle.[4] These bloody fellows—I mean our spokesmen over there—have a talent all their own for making the *International Working Men's Association* responsible for every local QUARREL between MASTER and MEN. At the same time, they neglect to take *any measures* for the event of war, i.e., establishing TRADES UNIONS. Instead they shout the more loudly. The petty cantonal government intervenes. The smallest incident thus becomes important. Then comes an appeal to the International Working Men's Association in general and the London General Council in particular to pay, ON THE SHORTEST NOTICE, the Swiss war costs. And then 'old man' Becker writes[5] that we should not 'compromise' ourselves again, as in the Geneva affair,[6] etc. Soon more about this and the Russian-International intermezzo/

The whole FAMILY sends the COMPLIMENTS OF THE SEASON. Tussy says POOR FRED, HE MUST FEEL RATHER SEEDY BY THIS TIME OF THE YEAR. *Addio.*

Your

K. M.