---
id: MECW43-052
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, August 6, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 August 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 6 August 1868

Dear Moor,

What do I do in this heat? Languish and drink. Today it is raining, the air is muggy and saturated with humidity, it is therefore doubly horrible, the sweat does not evaporate and you are damp all over.

Last Friday[1] I took Lizzie and M. Ellen[2] to Bridlington Quay and returned on Monday; tomorrow I shall return there with Moore, and I would take my HOLIDAY and stay the week, but Charles[3] has gout and is all in, so I must do his work as well as my own, and there can be no question of going away.

Eichhoff's pamphlet[4] proves something which I had scarcely credited him with—that he is capable of reporting facts objectively. Of course, you had also made it easy for him. The thing will have a very good effect. Now as regards the transfer to Geneva, it reminds me of the Central Authority's move to Cologne.[5] I would think this coup over *very thoroughly.* First, are the few jackasses worth it that you should take this step for their sake and hand over responsibility for the whole thing to people who, for all their good will, and also probably instinct, just do not have the stuff to lead a movement like this? Second, once we start moving house, and the holy respect for London, which is still the Medina of the emigration, has been replaced by a very doubtful respect for Geneva—what is the guarantee that the Proudhonists will not succeed in one fine day having the Council transferred, if only as a matter of international *courtoisie,*[6] to Brussels or Paris? Finally: such centres should never be put in places where *deportation* is possible, as long as we have a spot free from this risk.

The more splendidly things go, the more important it is that you should keep them in *your* hands, and now that the business is also beginning to get under way in Germany, I do not believe that Becker[7] has the stuff to manage it. I sent Kugelmann the biographical stuff on Friday from York.[8]

It is a very good thing that something about your book)[9] should now simultaneously appear in French papers, too. Nota bene, have at least 20-30 reprints made of my article in the *Fortnightly*[10] (for which we will naturally pay, *s'il le faut*[11], they can be used very well. ANYHOW, the conspiracy of silence is now over, and if the thing is only blazing a path slowly, it is now doing it surely.

GRAVEL is *Kies.* For the various stages of the Irish peat-ground I have no expressions, you will have to ask an East Frisian.

Borkheim has already reminded me of the 'date of maturity'. Best greetings to the entire sea-bathing company.

Your

F. E.