---
id: MECW43-126
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 10, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 December 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 December 1868

DEAR FRED,

You must return the enclosed letter to me immediately after reading it, since I must send it back to Kugelmann.[1]

Kugelmann (there is nothing else worthy of notice in his letter, which I am not sending, as I wish to reply to him) has this to say about Dr Freund, the 'author' of the letter:

'Recently, in Dresden, I recruited a promising pupil for you in the shape of a very intelligent colleague, a university teacher in Breslau. He told me he had written a small study on the worker question. I recommended him to read your book[2] before publishing his study. His own reflections had led him to Malthusian ideas.— I would like to have the enclosed letter returned *quite soon,* since I still have to reply to it.—Freund is now engaged in an *epoch-making* uior^dealing with the development of the normal and pathological pelvis, in particular, and of the skeleton, in general. In Dresden he gave a lecture on this that created a sensation. The professors and privy councillors received his brilliant discoveries with a dignified air of superiority, which vexed me. At the close of our section meeting I said a few words in order to emphasise Freund's achievements in a complimentary manner and I asked those who agreed with me to rise. The entire section rose, but—they were perfidious enough to omit this ovation from the minutes of the meeting. When I wanted to insist on its inclusion, Freund intervened himself and said he did not wish it. I believe he now regrets this. This is to make his letter understandable. When his work appears, Engels will, in any case, have to plough through it'.

(It appears you have to plough through everything.)

Your

K. M.