---
id: MECW43-158
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, February 24, 1869"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 February 1869"
year: 1869
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43, p. 221; First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 24 February 1869**

**Dear Fred**,

**Best thanks** for the **Report** [on the coalminers in Saxony]. It is transparently clear. I have changed nothing, except to strike out the final sentence (or rather some words of it). Yesterday read out in the Central Council. Adopted. Will be sent first to *The Times* (or rather taken there by Eccarius). If they don't take it, then to *The Daily News.* Then the English press cutting will be sent to *Zukunft, Social-Demokrat* and *Wilhelm.* The **poor devils** of Lugau will have the great satisfaction of being mentioned in the English press.

Enclosed **Resolutions***,* etc., 6 in all. The circumstances are as follows. The resolution of the Congress (Brussels) obliged us to have the Brussels resolutions printed. Using the excuse that the *Geneva* resolutions form part of the **platform**, we have printed, at the same time, *part* of what was tabled at the Geneva congress by the London Central Council and adopted by the Geneva congress, omitting the amendments, etc., proposed by the French in Geneva and *also* adopted — rubbishy stuff. Thus, this portion is written by me. On the other hand, I had no part in drafting the 1868 **Resolutions**. The only phrase from me verbatim is the **first considering 'On the effects of machinery'.**

That Bakunin should lay claim to the 'Slav' brothers in Courland and Livonia is great. Neither are his **claims on** Silesia bad.

What about Foster, **Exchanges**?

Meissner is a fine fellow; I sent him, a few days *before* your visit to London, a copy of Louis *Bonaparte.* Asked for *immediate* notification. No word yet.

Wilhelm remains unchangeably the same. He wrote to me that he had sent 50 or 60 copies to Kugelmann, but Kugelmann in fact has received only 6 copies!

*Salut.*

Your
K. M.