---
id: MECW43-081
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 29, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "29 September 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx,* Bd. 4, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA,* Abt. III, Bd. 4, Berlin, 1931 Printed according to the original Published i"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 29 September 1868

Dear FRED,

Enclosed and attached letter from Eichhoff[1] together with 2 issues of the *Social-Demokrat*[2] and the *Staatsbürger-Zeitung.*

You will see from them that 'boozy' Schulze-Delitzsch has succeeded in giving momentary importance to Schweitzer's stage-trick; that Schweitzer's whole congress consists *only* (minus 12 men) of Lassalleans 177; and that Schweitzer believes that he can in a very simple way replace his dictatorship over the General Association of German Workers by the dictatorship over the German working class. That is very naive.

The sole practical question for us is: Should I or should I not issue an appeal *at this moment?* In view of its position, the General Council must maintain an impartial stand. Would it not therefore be better to wait until 1. the nullity of the results of Schweitzer's game has become more apparent and, 2. Liebknecht and Co. have really organised something?

It appears to me that the power of the General Council greatly depends upon its not tying itself down prematurely and never doing so without certainty of success; it should, rather, practise Russian diplomacy in its operations.

If you share this view (and you must declare yourself in 2-3 days), I can simply write to Wilhelm and Eichhoff that the majority of the General Council has declared itself against any public proclamation until the elements that have joined the International Working Men's Association are sufficiently organised to provide the necessary backing.

Your

K. M.

In the meantime Lassalleanism, which is already crumbling, can be further subverted UNDERHAND as, e.g., by your article.