---
id: MECW43-067
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 12, 1868"
volume: 43
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "12 September 1868"
year: 1868
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 43, p. 95; First published: abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Berlin, 1931."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**Dear Fred**,

Luckily the congress ends today and up to Thursday — that is as far as the news goes — it had only compromised itself tolerably. But one must always fear some public disgrace, since the Belgians form the enormous majority. Mr Tolain and other Parisians want to have the **General Council** moved to Brussels. They are very **jealous of** London. It is a great step forward that the Proudhonist '*braves Belges'* and French, who dogmatically declaimed against **trades unions**, etc., in Geneva (*1866*) and Lausanne (*1867*), are now most fanatically in favour. In spite of all their boasting, the '*braves Belges'* had made no preparations. For example, the correspondent of *The Daily News* hunted in vain for 3 days for the possible meeting place until he accidentally ran into Jung and Stepney. In fact, the premises had not been booked in advance, and the '*braves Belges'* wanted to charge the expenses (among others, those for their 250 participants) to the London **General Council**, to which they and the French owe about 3,000 frs. The sum is now being raised by private collections among the delegates.

I am in a bad scrape. Laura has fallen sick since you were here, and my wife was forced to borrow £10 from her simply to meet the extra expenses, as we are absolutely broke.

I have heard nothing at all from Holland and must therefore regard the silence as intentional. I really do not know what to do.

Apropos. It was a good thing that we changed the word **convicts** into **victims**.

On the return of Shaw — who was sent at Moore's expense — the latter will receive his **receipt***.*

*Salut*.

Your
K. M.