---
id: MECW27-082
title: "Conditions for a Loan for the Founding of the Daily Arbeiter-Zeitung"
volume: 27
doc_type: article
author: "Frederick Engels"
written: "September 1894"
year: 1894
publication: "Written in September-early October 1894 First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981 Printed according to the manuscript Published in English for the first"
status: raw
---

Engels wrote down this note having learnt about the intention of the Austrian Social Democrats to turn their weekly Arbeiter-Zeitung into a daily. Engels approved this plan and did his best to help carry it through. On December 14, 1894 he wrote to Victor Adler that in London a group of people standing outside the party were ready to let the Arbeiter-Zeitung have about 5,000 florins on condition that Adler would have been "given the leading position "(see present edition, Vol. 50). Engels also arranged for the royalties for his works published by the Dietz Verlag in Stuttgart to be transferred to Victor Adler to cover the needs of the Austrian Social Democrats. Engels tried to get prominent members of the working-class movement in other countries to contribute to the paper and himself wrote a number of articles for it. He wrote a special greeting to the Austrian workers on the publication of the first issue of the daily Arbeiter-Zeitung on January 1, 1895 (see this volume, p. 505)

The conditions laid down are as follows:

1) The loan of 5,000 Fl. will be made to the *Arbeiter-Zeitung* firm, or whatever the name of the newspaper's registered firm may be; the receipt must be signed by this firm's legally authorised representatives. Payment is to be made to Dr. Victor Adler.

2) All business, negotiations, interest payments and repayments relating to the loan shall be made through Mrs. Louise Kautsky-Freyberger as the representative of the lender, and Dr. V. Adler, as the representative of the *Arbeiter-Zeitung*.

3) The loan may be called in for two years as from January 1, 1895. As from January 1, 1897 it may be called in at any time, and is then repayable by the end of the year following the day when notice is given.

4) The *Arbeiter-Zeitung* for its part may pay back the loan at an earlier date, at its convenience.

5) The loan will incur interest at a rate of 4% per year.

6) Payment will be made gradually from January 1, 1895; the repayments, the last of which shall be due not later than June 30, 1895, shall be made as far as possible at the convenience of the Arbeiter-Zeitung.