---
id: MECW27-016
title: "Letter to the Members of the Executive of the Communist German Workers' Educational Society"
volume: 27
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "11 December 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 50, Moscow, 1981 Printed according to the manuscript Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Vo"
status: raw
---

Engels expressed his gratitude for the letter sent to him on November 28, 1890 on the occasion of his 70th birthday by the members of the executive of the German Workers ' Educational Society in London.

The (Communist) German Workers' Educational Society in London was founded in 1840 by Karl Schapper, Joseph Moll together with other leaders of the League of the Just. Marx and Engels were actively involved in its work in 1847 and 1849-50. On September 17, 1850, they and some of their followers left the Society which had come to be dominated by the sectarian and adventurist Willich-Schapper group who were responsible for the split in the Communist League. From the late 1850s, Marx and Engels once again contributed to the work of the Society. When the First International was founded, the Society, with Friedrich Lessner among its leaders, became one of its sections. The London Educational Society existed up to 1918, when it was closed down by the British government.

**122 Regents Park Road, N.W .**

**December 11, 1890**

I am writing, albeit belatedly, to thank you for the congratulations enclosed with your kind letter of 28th of last month. Like you, I deeply regret that my friend Marx was not privileged to witness the present irresistible development of the proletarian socialist movement, a development for which he more than anyone else laid the foundations.

May your wishes be fulfilled and victory be near!

Yours sincerely,

***F. Engels***