---
id: MECW27-063
title: "Speech at a Social-Democratic Meeting in Vienna"
volume: 27
doc_type: article
author: "Frederick Engels"
written: "September 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published in the Neue Freie Presse, No. 10440, September 15, 1893 and Arbeiter-Zeitung, No. 38, September 22, 1893 Printed according to the Arbeiter Zeitung, checked with the Neue Freie Presse P"
status: raw
---

**[NEWSPAPER REPORT]**[1]

Esteemed Comrades!
I cannot leave this hall without expressing my deepest, heartfelt thanks for the undeserved reception given to me this evening. I can only say that unfortunately it is my fate to reap the fame of my departed friend. It is in this spirit that I accept your ovations. If I have been able to do anything for the movement in the fifty years I have belonged to it, I ask no reward. You are the finest reward! We have our people in the prisons of Siberia, we have them in the gold mines of California—everywhere, even as far afield as Australia. There is no country, no large state, where Social Democracy is not a power to be reckoned with. Everything that happens all over the world happens with due consideration to us. We are a great power that is to be feared, on which more depends than on the other great powers. That is my pride! We have not lived in vain, and can look back on our efforts with pride and satisfaction. In Germany they tried to stifle the movement by force, and each time the Social-Democratic movement has answered in ways which the bourgeoisie least expected.[2] The repeated elections, this steady, irresistible growth of the Social Democratic vote frightens the bourgeoisie, frightens Caprivi, and frightens all the authorities. (Tumultuous applause.) The previous speaker[3] observed that the Social-Democratic movement has always been underestimated abroad. My esteemed comrades, I have walked through the streets of Vienna and seen the wonderful buildings which the bourgeoisie has been kind enough to build for the proletariat of the future (tumultuous amusement) and I was also shown the magnificent arcaded building of the town hall, of which you have so deservedly taken possession. After that takeover of power no one will ever again underestimate you. (Vigorous applause.) That day was epoch-making. I saw the terror of the English newspaper correspondents— I was in London at the time—when they reported that on July 9 the proletariat ruled Vienna,[4] ruled it better than it has ever been ruled before. (Uproarious, persistent applause and hand-clapping. Constantly renewed cries of "Long live Engels".)