---
id: MECW27-072
title: "The Third Volume of Karl Marx's Capital"
volume: 27
doc_type: article
author: "Frederick Engels"
written: "9 January 1894"
year: 1894
publication: "Written about January 9, 1894  First published in the Vorwärts, No. 9, January 12, 1894 Printed according to the newspaper Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volum"
status: raw
---

The third volume of Capital prepared for publication by Engels appeared in the autumn of 1894. Engels signed the preface to it on October 4, 1894. Besides Vorwärts, this note was printed by the Sozialpolitisches Centralblatt, No. 16, January 14, 1894.

The third book of Marx's *Capital* is now being printed and will, we hope, appear not later than this September. The contents of this long-awaited third book will conclude the theoretical part of the work, leaving only the fourth and final book, which will contain a critical historical survey of the theories of surplus value.[1] The first book shows how the capitalist's surplus value is wrung out of the worker, and the second how this surplus value, which initially is contained in product, is realised in the form of money. These first two books are thus concerned only with surplus value so long as it is still in the hands of its first appropriator, the industrial capitalist. But it remains only partially in the hands of this first appropriator; it is later distributed to various interested parties in the form of commercial profit, profit of enterprise, interest and ground rent; and it is the laws of this distribution that are set out in the third book. With the production, circulation and distribution of surplus value, however, its entire life-cycle is concluded and there is nothing more to say about it. Apart from the laws of the profit rate in general, the third book examines commercial capital, interest-bearing capital, credit and banks, ground rent and landed property, which in conjunction with the themes dealt with in the first two books complete the "Critique of Political Economy " promised in the title.