---
id: MECW27-079
title: "To the English Socialist and Working Men's Organisations, August 1894"
volume: 27
doc_type: article
author: "Frederick Engels"
written: "6 August 1894"
year: 1894
publication: "First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946 Reproduced from the rough manuscript, checked with the version addressed to the Secretary of the Fabian"
status: raw
---

Engels wrote this address at the request of Pablo Iglesias, a leader of the Spanish Working Men's Socialist Party , set forth in his letter to Engels of July 27, 1894. Besides the rough draft addressed to the trade union congress, Engels mailed copies to the British socialist and workers 'organisations listed below in the letter. The letter sent to the Fabian Society is extant. Engels also sent similar greetings to the Social Democrats of Austria and Germany.

The fourth congress of the Spanish Working Men's Socialist Party took place in Madrid on August 29-September 1, 1894. It heard the reports of the Party's National Council and the delegate to the International Socialist Workers' Congress in Zurich (see Note 370), discussed the question of the party press and approved new Party Rules.

Dear Comrades,[1]

I am instructed by the Executive Council of the Spanish Working Men's Socialist Party to inform the English Working Men's [and ] Socialist Organisations that the said Spanish Socialist Party will hold their 4th annual Congress at Madrid on the 29 August and following days, and that they would be happy to receive on that occasion a few lines of congratulation—in Spanish or French—from English friends, directed to the address at foot.

The Belfast Trades Union Congress [of ] 1893[2] having adhered to the International Socialist Movement by voting a resolution demanding the socialisation of all means of production and exchange, I feel bound to include its organ the Parliamentary Committee [of the Trades Union Congress][3] in the list of those to whom this invitation is sent.[4]

This invitation is sent to

The Legal Eight Hours League

The Social Democratic Federation

" Independent Labour Party

" Fabian Society

" Parliamentary Committee of the Trades Union Congress

" Gas Workers and General Labourers Union.[5]

I am yours respectfully

***F. E.***

Pablo Iglesias

H. Cortés 8 principal. Madrid.