---
id: MECW27-020
title: "Greetings to the French Workers on the 20th Anniversary of the Paris Commune"
volume: 27
doc_type: article
author: "Frederick Engels"
written: "17 March 1891"
year: 1891
publication: "First published in Le Socialiste, No. 27, March 25, 1891  Priented according to the newspaper Translated from the French Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume "
status: raw
---

**London, March 17**

Citizens and citizenesses,

It is twenty years ago today that working-class Paris rose as one man against the criminal attack of the bourgeois and the rurals, led by Thiers. These enemies of the proletariat trembled when they saw the workers of Paris armed and organised to defend their rights. Thiers thought to deprive them of the arms which they had used with glory against the foreign invasion and which they would use even more gloriously against the attacks of the Versailles mercenaries. To crush Paris in revolt the rurals and the bourgeois begged for and obtained the Prussians ' assistance . After an heroic struggle , Paris was crushed by weight of numbers and disarmed.

For twenty years now the workers of Paris have been without arms, and it is the same everywhere: in all the large civilised countries the proletariat is deprived of the material means of defence. Everywhere it is the adversaries and exploiters of the working class who have armed forces under their exclusive control.

What has all this led to ?

It means that today , when every able-bodied man serves in the army, this army increasingly reflects popular feelings and ideas, and this army, the great means of repression, is becoming less secure day by day: already the heads of all the big states foresee with terror the day when soldiers under arms will refuse to butcher their fathers and brothers. We saw it in Paris when the Tonkinois[1] had the audacity to claim the presidency of the French republic; we see it today in Berlin , where Bismarck's successor[2] is asking the

Reichstag for the means to strengthen obedience in the army with non-commissioned officers bought for money-—because there are thought to be too many socialists amongst the N.C.O.s![3]

When such things start to happen, when day starts to dawn in the army, the end of the old world is visibly approaching. May destiny be fulfilled! May the bourgeoisie in its decadence abdicate or die, and long live the Proletariat! Long live the international social Revolution!

***F. Engels***