---
id: MECW27-008
title: "Draft of a Reply to the Editors of the Sächsische Arbeiter-Zeitung"
volume: 27
doc_type: article
author: "Frederick Engels"
written: "6 September 1890"
year: 1890
publication: "Written on about September 6, 1890 First published in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XVI, Part II, Moscow, 1936 Printed according to the manuscript Source : Marx-Engels Collected"
status: raw
---

Engels wrote the "Draft of a Reply to  the Editors of the Sächsische Arbeiter-Zeitung" following the attempt of the editorial board, which was made up of members of the "Young" opposition group, to present his work as supporting the newspaper's campaign against the policies pursued by the German Social-Democratic leadership. In late August 1890 the materials carried by the newspaper, which had an independent status, placed it under the party and resulted in the resignation of its editorial board which tried, in its farewell article, to present this as a consequence of a build-up of "petty-bourgeois parliamentary socialism" in the party and to take advantage of Engels' authority to promote its own ends. The indignant Engels felt compelled to deal a public rebuff to the "Young".

This version of the reply to the editors of the Sächsische Arbeiter-Zeitung was not completed and exists as a rough draft. The final version  was printed by Der Sozialdemokrat, the Berliner Volksblatt and the Sächsische Arbeiter-Zeitung and went a long way towards exposing the "Young's" true colours. Engels' reply was also carried by the Arbeiter-Zeitung, No. 38, September 19, 1890.

The "Young"— a petty-bourgeois semi-anarchist opposition group in German Social Democracy, which finally took shape in 1890. At that time, its leadership was made up of students and aspiring writers (hence the name of the opposition), who claimed the role of party theorists and leaders for  themselves. Among the "Young's" leaders were Paul Ernst, Paul Kampffmeyer, Hans Müller, and Bruno Wille. Failing to realise that the conditions of party work had changed following the repeal of the Anti-Socialist Law, the "Young" refused to employ legal methods of struggle, opposed the Social Democrats' participation in parliamentary elections and the use of parliamentary methods, and accused the party and its leadership of defending the interests of petty-bourgeoisie, opportunism, and a departure from democratic principles. In October 1891, the Erfurt congress of the Social-Democratic Party of Germany expelled some of the opposition leaders from the party.

In their farewell message in No. 105 (August 31, 1890) the retiring editors of the Sächsische Arbeiter-Zeitung state that petty-bourgeois parliamentary socialism now had a majority in Germany. But majorities often very quickly became minorities,

"and so the retiring editors of the Sächsische Arbeiter-Zeitung join Friedrich Engels in hoping that, as the naive state socialism of Lassalle was overcome in the past, the success-hungry parliamentary tendency among the present-day Social Democrats will also soon be overcome by the common sense of the German working class".[1]

Had I been able to entertain the slightest doubt about the nature of the latest student revolt in our German party, then my eyes would have been opened by this height of impertinence displayed by the ex-editors of one of its main organs. The ex-editors "join" me in hoping—therefore I join them in hoping—that the tendency represented by people such as Auer, Bebel, Liebknecht, Singer should soon have the minority, and that the "principled attitude" represented by the ex-editors the majority of the German workers behind it. This means that the hopes of the ex-editors have been directly and falsely attributed to me and I shall see that they are made to answer for this personally.

I have felt no urge to involve myself in the brawl initiated by these student gents and men of letters. However, I have expressed my opinion frankly to all who wished to hear it. And if the brawling gents want to hear it publicly, so be it.

When these gents began to kick up a row against the party executive and the parliamentary group, I asked myself in surprise: what are they after? What is all this aimed at? As far as I could see, there was no reason at all for the whole enormous palaver. On the disputed question of May Day the party executive had perhaps hesitated too long with its declaration. However, it consisted of five persons, living in four widely separated places, and needing time to reach an understanding. But when it spoke, it said the right thing, the only fitting thing in the situation. Events in Hamburg have proved it more than right.[2]

In the debate some members of the parliamentary group and the party executive have certainly been clumsy. Things like this occur always and everywhere, and reflect upon the individual, not the whole group. In its draft rules the parliamentary group has been responsible for some few offences against the democratic code of conduct.[3] But this is only a draft, and it is up to  the Party Congress to adopt it, reject it, or amend it. The London Conference of the International in 1871 also committed such sins of form, and the Bakuninists immediately took them up, making them the formal lever for their attacks on the General Council.[4] For all that, everybody knows today that the real democracy rested in the General Council, and not in the Bakuninist Council,[5] which had engineered a whole secret conspiratorial apparatus  in order  to put the International at its service.

When,  at the time of the Steamer Subsidy, the then parliamentary group did not for a moment know what it wanted, and sought to make the editors of the Sozialdemokrat the scapegoat for their own perplexity, I took a thoroughly decisive stand on the side of the editors and against the parliamentary group.[6] I would do the same again today were the parliamentary group or the party executive really to do things which seriously endangered the party. But there is no question of anything of this sort today; the