---
id: MECW27-055
title: "To the German Workers on May Day 1893"
volume: 27
doc_type: article
author: "Frederick Engels"
written: "13 March 1893"
year: 1893
publication: "First published in the May Day issue of the Vorwärts, May 1, 1893 Printed according to the May Day  issue, checked with the rough manuscript Published in English in full for the first time in Marx-Eng"
status: raw
---

What better can I tell the German workers today than about the coming May Day celebration here in England, which, particularly this year, will be of special importance.[1] If Germany now is no longer Heinrich Heine's "pious nursery",[2] then Englan do f today is no longer the model country of the German academic tender-hearts, the country where worthy TRADES UNIONS and progress within the law ensure that the bogus dreams of socialism find no soil. That has gone for ever. The working class of England, after its glorious struggles and ultimate defeats in the Chartist period, has taken a long time to get under way again. But it is undoubtedly under way again. Those socialist organisations which exist here were until recently no more than simply sects, compared with which the old TRADES UNIONS appeared a great force in fact. Hence the protestation of the tame German academics that the English workers did not wish to abolish the wage system, but only refine it . But how are things today? The masses of the workers are awakening more and more to the realisation that their salvation lies not so much in wresting higher wages and shorter hours in the struggle against individual employers, but above all in winning political rights, parliament,[3] through the working class organised into an independent party. This was first demonstrated in the general election of 1892. The workers prevailed with three of their candidates'[4] in the struggle against both old parties, and in addition in over twenty constituencies gave the latter a tough taste of their power, hitherto unexerted. This increased enormously the self-awareness of the workers.

In England, even with the present limited suffrage, the workers form the absolute majority in at least 150 constituencies. If the electoral reform[5] introduced by the government goes through, then in 200. And even today the worker votes are decisive in a majority of all constituencies. What the awakening of the workers to class consciousness means under such circumstances is obvious. The workers only have to want it, and England cannot be governed against their will.

This awakening is also shown in the preparations for this year's May Day. For the first time the negotiations are going smoothly, without wrangles and petty jealousy, with unanimous enthusiasm. And what is more: the socialists hold the leadership, and for the first time the celebrations will have an unquestionably Social - Democratic character.

March 13, 1893

***Frederick Engels***