---
id: MECW39-121
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 2, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "2 November 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published considerably abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA*, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 Published in English for the fir"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 2 November 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

Received your letter together with £5. 10/- given to Dronke. The time when we had to be coy about writing openly to each other's actual addresses is now past. On Saturday (30 October) the lawyers received the bulk of the documents, on Sunday, the second letter from Frankfurt, and yesterday my last letter with the DECLARATION before the magistrate. Today I have sent by registered post direct to Schneider II the declaration[1] which appeared in today's *Morning Advertiser*, not so much because there was still any necessity to do so, as to show the Prussian government that we possess the means to insist on the integrity of its mails or, failing that, to expose it before the London public.

The lawyers received all they needed in good time, i.e. *before* the prosecution *closed* its case. At present I am of the opinion that, unless some incident should prolong the trial and thus necessitate renewed intervention on our part, *nothing* more should go off to Cologne.

Herewith a letter from Imandt to Cluss, which contains more details about Kinkel's and Willich's *escroquerie*.[2] Up till now I hadn't had time to read the letter and had done no more than have it copied out for you by Pieper. It went off to Washington last Friday.[3]

Fleury, a merchant in the CITY, says that he can bear witness that he and other businessmen have been invited by Kinkel and Willich to purchase Loan Notes.

Just now that *chevalier d'industrie*,[4] Willich, is living on the bounty of the Russian, Herzen.

From what Freiligrath told me yesterday, it would appear that, before his departure for Manchester, Kinkel had been grovelling with renewed zeal before a crowd of CITY ALDERMEN, merchants, etc., in his role of fund-raiser, rhetorician and lesson-giver.

As for the scrap of paper wrongly attributed to me, all I still need is the *address of Moses Hess*, who is living in Liège. For I am going to write to him and say: 'Tell me who it was you gave the *Catechism* to and who hawked it round Germany. Otherwise I shall denounce you as a FORGER in the *Indépendance*.' Moses is bound to spill the beans, if it transpires that on this occasion it was not the police but Kinkel-Willich who imitated my handwriting, I shall have them up in court here for imitating another's hand.

Don't forget to send me the last bit for Dana.[5] Parliament assembles on Thursday.[6] The article is already somewhat out-of- date. But *after* Friday it will be completely worthless.

Kind regards to Weerth and Strohn.

Your

K. M. The merchant, Fleury, further testifies that, *almost every week*, Willich extorts *pounds* from him and his English friends on the plea that he needs this for the refugees. Now, it can be proved that Willich-Kinkel rudely turn away *all* refugees with the remark that they have not a centime to spare for such purposes. Willich tells them that he hasn't enough himself for his daily bread; Kinkel points with emotion to his children, and at most gives away a waistcoat cast off by the late Julius, the absent Schurz or his own august person.