---
id: MECW39-045
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, April 27, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "27 April 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX IN LONDON

Manchester, 27 April 1852

Dear Marx,

Herewith Weydemeyer's latest, which sounds rather more hopeful. For the time being I am keeping your article[1] here 1. so as to read it, and 2. so as to translate it into English at some later date, which will be easily done, omitting such figures of speech as are comprehensible only to Germans.

*Voilà* *donc*;[2] Moses Hess, in the *Kölnische* *Zeitung*,[3] with a warrant out against him for high treason. I'll be hanged if this hasn't happened because Father Dronke was found carrying those idiotic papers concerning their important business in Geneva. *Cela* *valait* *bien* *la* *peine*![4] In the meantime Moses again becomes a martyr, which will greatly enhance his *otium* *cum* *dignitate*[5] maybe he will shortly be dispatched to London—*est-ce* *que* *nous* *n'échapperons* *jamais* *à* *cet* *imbécile*?[6] At any rate, all this can make things extremely awkward again for the poor devils in Cologne and provide new grounds for dragging out their trial; had they already been referred to the Court of Assizes, we should surely have heard about it.

Freiligrath has written asking for an introduction to my brother-in-law[7] —I am sending it to him today; evidently he is determined to look round for a post.

Warm greetings to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

Splendid division on the Militia Bill last night.[8] If the Almighty vouchsafes a few more like it, the new election will be postponed until September or October. SERVES THE WHIGS RIGHT AND THE FINANCIALS[9] TOO! I see that Jones intends after all to bring out his PAPER straight away—it was a mean trick Harney played him over the *Star*, but it was lucky that Jones did not acquire that doomed, discredited, wretched old paper.[10] Let Harney dig its grave and his own at the same time.