---
id: MECW39-067
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, July 13, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "13 July 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels "
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 13 July 1852

Dear Engels,

There being no letter from you, I conclude that the worthy Weydemeyer must, for all that, be still persevering with his 'system'. The thing's becoming really incomprehensible and, quite aside from the pecuniary loss, which is just now very perceptible, is turning me for good measure into the laughing stock of the émigré vermin and of the booksellers whom I had approached about this unfortunate affair.

I have not written an article on the elections because I feel it would be better to await the full results.[1] From what I have seen so far, it seems to me that, apart from 5-6 more votes for the Whigs, the old Parliament will rise again unchanged. The fellows are in a *cercle vicieux*[2] from which they cannot break out. The only ones to have suffered any significant losses so far are the Peelites.[3] Meanwhile, in an apologia for Graham, *The Morning Chronicle* declares that only one alternative remains, that Whigs are as incompetent as Tories, and that the only capable people, apart from Graham and his supporters, are Cobden, Bright and Co. And these should govern together. Curiously enough, the following day—as you may perhaps have seen,—*The Times* carried an article which likewise contained an apologia for Graham.[4]

The great Techow is emigrating to Australia next week, together with Madame Schmidt-Stirner. But—and this will wound you more deeply—even *Damm* is no less eager to turn his hand to AUSTRALIAN GOLD-DIGGING. Another few months of peace, and all our 'world underminers'[5] will be busily mining for dirt in the dirt of Australia. Only Willich, firmly chained to the *coffre-fort*,[6] remains faithful to his motto: to live but BY NO MEANS work.

Bangya is now on very close terms with the Orleanist intriguer, 'de Rémusat'. Some Hungarian *quelconque*[7] warned him against the man who is said to have 'betrayed' the Germans during the *complot allemand-français*.[8] Rémusat has agents right in the Paris Prefecture. So, *sans mot dire à M. Bangya*[9] he writes asking for a report on this gentleman. The reply, which was communicated to me, stated that Bangya was *in no way suspect*, that he had got out in time, otherwise he too would have been arrested. The traitor was *un certain Cherval, nommé Frank, mais dont le véritable nom est Cramer*.[10]

From the outset this Cherval is said to have been hand in glove with the police. What is more, Rémusat is receiving original letters written by Cherval to the Prussian Embassy, stating that, in accordance with promises made to him in the Mazas, and now that he had professed the *principe* of *ordre*, it was *leur devoir*[11] to provide him with the necessary *moyens*.[12] The Prussian Embassy, however, declared that since he was being paid as a spy by the French, and *double emploi*[13] was out of the question, he could have no claims on the Prussians. He was therefore sent to London to observe the German refugees and, in addition, to 'keep an eye on Claremont'.[14] In the latter capacity he called on Rémusat and offered him his services as an agent. Rémusat, on instructions from Paris, pretended to agree and assigned to him a go-between in the person of a valet at Claremont; this man was now entrusted with the task of misinforming the Paris police through Cherval.

So well organised is the Orleanist agitation that the fellows possess what amounts to a regular clandestine postal service by which one can send letters, parcels, and pamphlets to France as safely as innocuous matter by ordinary mail.

My main concern in all this was to procure an original letter of Cherval's relating to his connections with the Prussian Embassy. Such a *pièce* could topple the whole fabric of the bill of indictment.[15]

I have arranged with Bangya that, as soon as another copy has been made, *you* will receive Szemere's pamphlet in manuscript.[16] It is a document that is indispensable to your work[17] since it contains letters from Görgey, Kossuth, etc., which have not been published anywhere.

My wife is very poorly, she has a cough and is losing weight. However, the doctor says it is nothing dangerous and has, in addition to medicine, prescribed plenty of porter.

If you can manage to send me another article[18] by Friday, I will try to discount with Johnson the £5 that will then become due from Dana.

Apropos. The Domenichi *Orlando Innamorato riformato* is an *adaptation*. The original is very rare and only to be had in large libraries, as here. Even the Domenichi edition is rare. More readily available is the *Orlando, rifatto*[19] by Berni.[20]

Your

K. M.