---
id: MECW39-150
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, April 10, 1853"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 April 1853"
year: 1853
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Sunday, 10 April [1853]

Dear Marx,

I return herewith Cluss' letter.[1] And there, it seems, the matter will have to rest until we have before us the whole of Hirsch's document,[2] and also his first statement[3] which Weydemeyer has retained (do you know anything more about this?). The Bangya business isn't very nice; however, *au bout du compte*,[4] it is better to settle it now than later. According to what you write you have full proof against Bangya to hand now, and, of course, there is also Zerffi to vouch for the Greif business.[5] Knowing as we do now what is coming, we have time to prepare a proper answer.[6] I shall look out Bangya's and the fictitious Collmann's letters.[7] So far as I am concerned, the pamphlet[8] can be printed in America.

Some of the things in Hirsch's statement are perfectly correct, e.g. concerning your letter from Manchester.[9] At the same time, of course, he does his fair share of lying and keeping things under his hat. For instance, he forgets to say that he followed you to Manchester, clearly not by accident, and that, meeting us one Sunday in the Bury New Road with another loafer, he called out quite loudly as he went by: 'Good morning, Marx!' You will recall that we wondered who it might be; *ce fut notre cher Hirsch*.[10] Likewise the affair of Mrs Daniels' letter and the domiciliary visit.[11]

It is curious how many spies à *la* Cooper[12] seem to be turning up just now. Chenu, Cherval, Hirsch. It's a good thing Hirsch now testifies that Bangya was never able to report anything about you except personal tittle-tattle.

Inquiries must be made about the persons mentioned. Lanckoronski is clearly none other than the 'Count L.' denounced by you as a Russian agent in the Kossuth-Bonaparte article.[13] As far as Bangya is concerned, we are fully covered by Kossuth and Szemere and, if he possessed a manuscript of Szemere's,[14] why not one of ours?[15] It's an excellent thing that we have *always* kept *everything* that came our way.

Apropos. Not long ago Dronke made a terrible fuss about my not providing him AT A MOMENTS NOTICE with the Reichenbach circular[16] and now, in the parcel of American papers, I find it reproduced at least ten times. Couldn't the lazy devil have searched it out himself?

*Pour revenir*.;[17] I don't believe anything can be done publicly for the time being, i.e. until we've had a thorough examination of the documents; preliminary steps, no more—for instance, finding out where the document came from, the present whereabouts of Hirsch and what he is doing and, if necessary, confronting the fellow in order to extract another written statement from him. I shall also take immediate steps to find out more about the business of Fleury and the theft[18] unfortunately my informant, a personal acquaintance of his, is ill. Mind you send me without delay the requisite personal description, etc., etc.

Today I have leafed through most of the American papers sent to me. Much is very amusing but, when there's such a pile of them, it's a very trying and stultifying job. By comparison, Cluss' letters are a delight. I see that the *Revelations* are already appearing in the *Neu-England-Zeitung*;[19] it's really too bad of Weydemeyer not to have got them into the *Criminal-Zeitung*. The least he can now do is to catch up with the main content—drop him a heavy hint to that effect by the next STEAMER, otherwise it may never occur to him.

I have not yet read the pile of (New York) *Demokrats* in which Weydemeyer publishes his articles; I'm saving them up for this evening.

Between ourselves, I am now pretty well convinced that it was, after all, Monsieur Bangya who betrayed Kothes' address.[20] It's a good thing nobody knows about it.

If the business of Hirsch and Bangya becomes any more involved, there'll be another job for us to do when you come up.

What are your prospects of a visit? I am counting on seeing you here in May at the latest.

You will have had my Friday's letter[21] and with it £3. Warm regards to your wife.

Your

F. E.