---
id: MECW39-086
title: "Letter to Peter Imandt, August 27, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "27 August 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow 1962 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

MARX TO PETER IMANDT

IN LONDON

[London,] 27 August 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Imandt,

2 truly memorable memoranda!...[1] If that's not champion drivel[2] or however the saying goes.

However, in your place I would *reply* *to* *the* *lads*: At your guarantors' meeting you nominated a committee (provisional), consisting of Reichenbach, Löwe and Schurz, to settle matters. You were to await that committee's report. Kinkel and Willich were in no way empowered either to ask questions or to receive answers. Their threat that anyone in Europe failing to answer by 1 September (extremely short notice) would be held to be in agreement with them, is merely an attempt by them and Co., after their failure at the meeting, to *take* *over* *the* *administration* *of* *the* *funds* by stealth. You should protest against this procedure and say you will, if necessary, publish your protest with your full reasons for it.

At the same time I would write to *Reichenbach*: Repeat the foregoing and declare that he must see to it that *not* *a* *centime* is paid out until *the* *committee* *nominated* *by* *yourselves* has submitted *its* *report*. Draw his attention to a few of the chief points of the document, but more especially to the following:

'In order that we may make use of the funds if need arise, we propose that the guarantors in America accord us with the utmost dispatch the right to co-opt a third colleague. In which case we should elect either Goegg or some other local member of the Revolutionary League, etc'

I.e. what the gentlemen have in mind is to get the money out of Reichenbach's hands 'with the utmost dispatch' because great 'need has now arisen' for Willich and Co. to 'make use of the funds'.

You could slip into both these letters a few jokes about the 'treaty of union'.[3]

Return me the documents as soon as possible, so that I can send reports to Germany and America (for which the next post leaves on Tuesday)[4] 'with the utmost dispatch'.

*Salut*.

Your

K. M.