---
id: MECW39-096
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 18, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "18 September 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 18 September 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

If you delay sending back the translation[1] for another few days, the possibility of getting it taken will be absolutely nil. Interest in Bonaparte, having again attained a peak,[2] is now giving way to fresh topics, as always happens in London.

The discounting affair has come to naught after a week spent on a wild goose-chase with a rascal from the CITY *nommé* Poenisch. I therefore wrote to Dana yesterday.[3] At the same time I told him that there were only two more articles, 19 and 20, to come ON GERMANY. As soon as you send me 19[4] I shall write to you again, giving my views on 20, the concluding one. Within the next few days the Customs Union business, too, will have been decided, and without it 20 cannot be finished.[5]

Physically, my wife is lower than ever before, i.e. sheer debility. On doctor's orders she has been taking a spoonful of brandy every hour for the past 3 days. There is however some improvement, inasmuch as she has at least got up today. She has been in bed for a week. Little Laura is convalescent, the others ALL RIGHT. I shall not be able to write at length before next week. This week has been wasted on abortive business errands and the most nauseous wrangling *cum creditoribus*.

Your

K. M.

With next week's letter I shall also return the documents. Let me have Massol's letter back.