---
id: MECW39-263
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 31, 1855"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "31 January 1855"
year: 1855
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 31 January 1855

Dear Engels,

Enclosed 2 articles on Gladstone's financial policy.[1] In the first one, the chaps have clearly misprinted some figures. However, all you are really concerned with is refreshing your memory as to the SPIRIT of the whole plan.

Herewith a survey of the Coalition's activities:

*1853*

*December* *16*? Fall of Disraeli overthrown (by a majority of 19), ostensibly because of the extension of the HOUSE-TAX and the

'EXTENSION OF THE GENERAL AREA OF *DIRECT* TAXATION'. The determining factor, the Irish Brigade[2]

Coalition formed:

*CHRISTMAS* *RECESS*. *February* *10*. Parliament reassembles. Russell's old programme of 1850. No question of a Reform Bill[4] until they reassembled the following winter.

On the other hand, a mass of practical and administrative reforms promised: law reform, railway regulations, education, etc. Gladstone postpones his budget until *after* the EASTER RECESS.

*February* *18*.

*** 'It is no longer a Ministry of Reform: It is a Ministry of Progress, every member of which resolves to do nothing. All difficult questions are open questions'* (*Disraeli*).[6]

*21* *February*. Clarendon FOREIGN MINISTER. Russell Minister without portfolio or salary.

*February* *24*. Russell's Jewish bill.[7] * 'The Policy of Abstention' proclaimed on the Eastern question, is also the ministerial policy at home.*

*4* *April*. RUSSELLS EDUCATIONAL REFORM BILL.

*7* *April*. Before presentation of the budget: GLADSTONE'S FINANCIAL SCHEME.

*15* *April*. Debate in the House on the GUNPOWDER PLOT.[8] It transpires that Palmerston is acting as GENERAL INFORMER for the CONTINENTAL POLICE.

*EASTER* *RECESS* (don't know the date).

*31* *May*. Russell insults Catholics in Parliament.[9] Irish members[10] resign from Ministry. Aberdeen's letter to them of 3 June.[11] Russell retracts.

Main items in the spring and summer session: 1. *India* *Bill*: Ministry wishes to extend EAST INDIA COMPANY CHARTER (EXPIRING ON APRIL, 1854) by 20 years. Is *compelled* to drop this, its bill remaining in force *only* *provisionally* and for so long as it pleases Parliament. Apart from laying down that APPOINTMENTS IN THE CIVIL SERVICE AND SCIENTIFIC MILITARY SERVICES are to be subject to open competition, this Act confines itself to the following: Sir Charles Wood (President of the BOARD OF CONTROL) is to receive £5,000 instead of £1,200 as previously, 18 DIRECTORS instead of 24. Instead of all being nominated by the COURT OF PROPRIETORS, now 12 to be nominated by the latter and 6 by the Ministry. Salary of DIRECTORS to be once more *increased* from £300 to £500, those of the CHAIRMAN and DEPUTY CHAIRMAN to £1,000. GOVERNOR-GENERALSHIP of India to be separated from the GOVERNORSHIP of Bengal. New PRESIDENCY ON THE INDUS. Thus, instead of the inexpensive and, as practice has shown, efficient SIMPLE COMMISSIONERS, new GOVERNORS and PRESIDENTS with LUXURIOUS COUNCILS. NEW SINECURES. A few quite insignificant little reforms in the Indian judiciary.

2. *Budget*. Many of its FEATURES lifted from Disraeli, but whereas it removes EXCISE DUTIES for the benefit of the town, Disraeli did so ostensibly for the benefit of the FARMERS; thus the tea DUTY business, extension of direct taxation, etc., of Jewish origin. Some of the most important decisions forced upon Gladstone after he and his opposition to them had been repeatedly *voted* *down* in Parliament. For instance, the abolition of the ADVERTISEMENT DUTY; the SUCCESSION DUTY. LICENSING SYSTEM, NEW REGULATION dropped after undergoing several transformations in the course of the session. Of the budget, which made its début with all the pretensions of a systematic encyclopaedia, nothing remains save a *mixtum* *compositum*[12] of LITTLE ITEMS. *Typical* *feature*: the noble Gladstone includes in his BUDGET a special BILL—abolition of STAMPS ON NEWSPAPER SUPPLEMENTS—intended to buy *The* *Times*, in effect making it a present of £30-40,000 a year. Since it alone issues SUPPLEMENTS, consolidates its monopoly.[13] *The* *Times* gratefully abandons its campaign against his INCOME TAX and today is again demanding his inclusion in the new Cabinet.

3. *Three* *Irish* *LANDLORDS* *and* *TENANTS* *BILLS*[14] Introduced by the *Tory* *Napier*[15] under the Derby MINISTRY Passed on 1 August after 10 months' deliberation in the COMMONS. Aberdeen (9 August) expresses his satisfaction in the LORDS at their having been burked there.[16]

4. * Parliamentary reform, national education reform, law reform (a few trifles apart) etc. *postponed*. Transportation Bill,[17] Navigation Bill * etc. inherited from the Derby MINISTRY. Jewish bill rejected. Nothing can truly be described as the MINISTRY'S own [save a] *the* *great* *CAB* *ACT* which had no sooner crossed the threshold than it required revision by Parliament because 'all the talents' of the chaps had not even sufficed to create hackney carriage regulations. β) Gladstone's conversion of the PUBLIC DEBT, the FAILURE of which he had to admit before Parliament as early as 28 JULY[18]

*August* *20*. (Day of Parliament's PROROGATION—27 October.) Palmerston dismisses the Commons with the assurance that they need not worry about the Eastern affair, * 'as far as the evacuation of the principalities was concerned...* their PLEDGE was, *"his confidence in the honour and character of the Russian Emperor", which would move him to withdraw his troops voluntarily from the principalities'*.[19]

*3* *December*. Sinope.

*12* *December*. Note of the 4 POWERS to the Porte, in which *au* *fond*[20] more was demanded of it than in the Vienna Note.[21]

*14* *December*. First, Palmerston agrees in the *Conseil*[22] of Ministers to telegraph Vienna, saying the Sinope affair should not be allowed to upset the negotiations; then, in order to deceive the philistines, on

*15* *December*, hands in his RESIGNATION, allegedly because opposed to Russell's REFORM BILL. Returns to office, of course, as soon as his end attained.

*1854*

*Mid-January*. Resignation of *Sadleir*, the BROKER to the Irish Brigade, following SCANDALOUS DISCLOSURES before an IRISH COURT OF LAW. Had been Junior Lord of the Treasury. (*Later*, the VIRTUOUS Gladstone wishes to dispatch to Australia as Governor his relative, Lawley, speculator in stocks while secretary to the CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER and BETTING man. Discredited in Parliament. This same 'virtuous' chap engages O'Flaherty, who makes off with the cash-box, and brings one *Hajward* into the POOR LAW ADMINISTRATION on the strength of a lengthy lampoon against Disraeli. All the dirt piles up on the virtuous Gladstone.)

*Beginning* *of* *February*. Parliament reopens.

*6* *February*. Palmerston announces his intention to introduce a bill for the organisation of the militia in Ireland and Scotland.[23] 28 March. War declared. Bill not introduced until *end* *of* *June*.

*13* *February*. Russell introduces his Reform Bill, which he had made both a condition and an excuse for joining the Coalition. Withdraws it 10 weeks later with 'tears in his eyes'. As a token of gratitude, again made President OF THE PRIVY COUNCIL and gets a salary.[24]

*6* *March*. Gladstone demands

DOUBLES THE INCOME TAX FOR 6 MONTHS, *MAY* *8* has again to introduce a new budget.

*Mid-March*. The Czar[26] forces the chaps to declare war by publishing the 'SECRET AND CONFIDENTIAL CORRESPONDENCE',[27] which opens with a dispatch of 11 January 1853[28] and brands as deliberate lies all the statements made by the chaps during 1853.

*7* *April*. Lord Grey (even then minded to become War Minister; notorious for having, as Colonial Minister, brought every English colony to the verge of rebellion) makes his speech in the LORDS[29] complaining about *England'*s lack of *military* *organisation*. This merely provides the Ministers with an opportunity—*8* *June*—of creating one more *post* and one more *salary* by separating the MINISTRY *FOR* WAR[30] from the COLONIAL MINISTRY without concentration of DEPARTMENTS. *Cholera* is likewise used as a pretext to create an INDEPENDENT President of the 'Board of Health' and thus a new ministerial post and salary.

*May* *29*.

*** 'Their' * (the Ministers') * 'measures were kicked overboard in a very unceremonious manner'* (*Bright*).[31]

*Résumé* *of* *their* *domestic* *activities* *during* *this* *2nd* *session*: 7 major bills introduced. *3* of them * *defeated*: bill for the entire change of the law of settlement;[32] bill for public education in Scotland; bill on the entire reconstruction of Parliamentary oaths.[33] *3* *withdrawn*: Bribery Prevention Bill; bill for the complete change of the civil service; measure for Parliamentary Reform. 1 bill—Oxford Parliamentary Reform Bill * passed, in very mutilated and modified form.

*August* *12*. Prorogation of Parliament.

*Extraordinary* *December* *session*: Bills relating to the FOREIGN LEGION[34] and the Militia.[35]

A perusal of this list will recall enough facts to enable you to ridicule the fellows and, incidentally, cast a few aspersions on the worthy Palmerston in advance (in case he should become Premier).