---
id: MECW39-258
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 17, 1855"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "17 January 1855"
year: 1855
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 This lett"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 17 January 1855

Dear Frederic,

I could not, OF COURSE, write to the *Tribune* yesterday nor can I do so for some time à *venir*[1] because yesterday morning, between 6 and 7 o'clock, my wife was delivered of a *bona fide* TRAVELLER[2] — unfortunately OF THE 'SEX' *par excellence*. If it had been a male child, well and good.

Did you know that red Wolff[3] is one of the *Augsburger'*s London correspondents? I found out by chance, namely by reading an article in the said paper[4] containing all manner of fatuous elucubrations on 'house' and 'home' and 'abroad'—all this to throw light on the 'ordure' with which the British troops are contending at Balaklava. I saw Freiligrath and told him that in the Augsburg *Allgemeine Zeitung* I'd read some nonsense of which only Lupus Rufus could be capable. Freiligrath thereupon confirmed that Wolff was the 'REAL, IDENTICAL Kobes'.[5]

I now have Heine's 3 volumes at home. Amongst other things he retails at some length a lie to the effect that I, etc., went to console him after he had been 'attacked' in the Augsburg *A.Z.* for having accepted money from Louis Philippe[6] / The good Heine deliberately forgets that my intervention on his behalf took place at the end of 1843 and thus could have no connection with FACTS which came to light *after* the February revolution of 1848.[7][8] BUT LET IT PASS. Worried by his evil conscience,—the old dog has a monstrous memory for such things,—he is trying to ingratiate himself.

I expect something from you on FRIDAY,[9] then. I can't write any more today, having to send out a mass of cards giving notification of the baby's birth.

Your

K. M.