---
id: MECW39-242
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 2, 1854"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "2 September 1854"
year: 1854
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39, p. 479; First published: slightly abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, 1929."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

**[London,] 2 September 1854, 28 Dean Street, Soho**

Dear Frederic,

So now you're a member of the Exchange, and **altogether respectable. My gratulations**. Some time I should like to hear you howling amidst that pack of wolves.

Heise has written to Imandt, telling him that factory people — where I don't know (nor does he say whether they're workers or manufacturers) — have banded together to appoint him their **common instructor**, and that he can count on getting £2 a week. *Tant mieux pour lui* [so much the better for him].

My wife — as I had good reason to fear before she left — **is rather in too interesting circumstances**, otherwise well.

Cluss has written again at last. I enclose his letter.

Has your old man arrived yet?

It is probably time we said something in the *Tribune* about military events in Asia. I have made a bit of a howler. In one of my recent **letters** I declared the **news** of the total defeat of the Turks at Kars to be a Vienna **invention**. True, the telegraphic dispatch was wrong, but it was nevertheless based on fact.

**My principal study** is now **Spain**. So far I have swotted up, mainly from Spanish sources, the 1808-14 and the 1820-23 periods. Am now coming to the years 1834-43. The thing is not without complexity. It is rather more difficult to discover exactly the springs behind developments. At any rate I made a timely start with *Don Quixote.* The whole thing will amount to about 6 articles for the *Tribune*, if much condensed. At least it may be counted a step forward that **at this moment one's studies** are paid for.

Unfortunately the Library is closed from 1-7 September. Apart from other advantages, it's the only cool place in London.

*Entre nous*, Dronke, for want of other 'intellectual' stimulus, is busily engaged in investigating 'Steffen' and, in his letters to Imandt, tears him to pieces in an attempt to render him politically 'suspect'. I had no difficulty in convincing Imandt of the total absurdity of Dronke's mischievous cavilling. *C'est absurde.* I consider that in Steffen our [party] has made a very good acquisition. He has character and education. His views on comparative geography, in which he has specialised, are quite original. Unfortunately a manuscript in which he elaborated his ideas on the subject was left behind in Cologne.

What is Lupus doing? Miquel didn't come over from Paris as intended because, having had 2 attacks of cholera followed by a haemorrhage, he was finally ordered by the doctors to make his way back to Germany overland with all dispatch.

*Vale faveque.*

K. M.