---
id: MECW39-285
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 6, 1855"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 September 1855"
year: 1855
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39, p. 547; First published: abridged in *Der Wechsel zwischen F. Engels, und K. Marx*, 1913 and in full in Marx and Engels, Works, 1929."
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Manchester*

3 York Place, Denmark Street
(not Hill, which is merely the **general name** for the whole place)
*Camberwell*

Dear Engels,

You may already have read about the death of our friend Daniels in the *Kölnische Zeitung*. He is no more nor less than a victim of the infamies of the Prussian Police. I shall be writing a few lines to his wife, and you must do the same. Address: Frau Doktorin Amalie Daniels, Schildergasse, Köln. It would be desirable if Lupus did likewise. I know by experience how welcome letters from friends are at such a time. I shall write a short obituary of our poor friend for the *Tribune*. So far as the German-American Press is concerned, I think the best plan would be to insert in the New York *Neue Zeit* (nominally edited by Bernhardt, in fact by Löwe of Calbe) a brief obituary notice signed by you, Freiligrath, Lupus and myself. Also to denounce the proceedings against Bürgers.

You will have heard that O'Connor died a few days ago.

Jones' wife is mortally ill. The poor devil **is at this moment in desperate circumstances**.

**A steamer** is leaving on Tuesday. It is essential in the case of Putnam's that the thing should be in New York by 10th October at the latest. Have you received the copy that was sent you? Those inane bits of hair-splitting did not appear in the *Tribune* but in *The New-York Times*, the **rival paper**. As for Aldershot, the business was simply as follows: About a fortnight ago 2 privates were sentenced, one to 50 lashes, the other to 30, for 'disrespectful' behaviour towards their superiors. As is often the case, the **cat-o'-nine-tails** was steeped in urine. The first man had to be sent to hospital after receiving 40 lashes, and the second died shortly after receiving 30. There would appear to be no further question of an inquiry.

In *The Morning Advertiser*, Blind continues '**to shake the despotic powers of Europe to their very foundations**'.

A German rag has reappeared in London, the actual *rédacteur en chef* being the ill-famed Sigmund Engländer, of Paris police memory. Chief contributors: Ronge, the Russian Herzen and a drunkard by the name of Korn, allegedly an ex-captain.

*Vale.*

Your
K. M.