---
id: MECW39-311
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 23, 1854"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: "Jenny von Westphalen"
written: "23 May 1854"
year: 1854
publication: "First published in *Marx and Engels, Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow 1929. Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

JENNY MARX TO FREDERICK ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 23 May 1854] 3 o'clock in the afternoon

Dear Mr Engels,

Your article[1] has just arrived. It's already been addressed and I shall put it in the post at the same time as this note. Karl was tremendously pleased when he heard the postman's portentous double KNOCK. *Voilà* Frederik,[2] £2, we're saved! he cried. Unfortunately he is still very, very unwell and asks me to tell you that he is Lazarus and Peterkin Pint-pot rolled into one. There can be no question of writing. He labours over Gladstone's long speeches and is very annoyed at not being able to write just now when he's got enough material on Mr Gladstone and his SCHEMES. If you *possibly* *can'**,***** *do* *concoct* *something* *again* *for* *Friday*[3] *.'**** Anything will do, Karl says. I truly detest bothering you in this way, but send something if possible.*

I enclose herewith the latest dispatch from Cluss and would ask you to return his letter[4] and not tell Heise anything about it. The fellow chatters so and, should little Meyen or other eminent men hear anything prematurely, communications to Cluss would at once stop. It's all very amusing and the gentlemen should be allowed to carry on undisturbed.

In his last letter to Imandt, consisting of a whole lot of little snippings glued together, Heise said he had now again given up the military DODGE since the Russians waged war differently from the way the *Tribune* said; he intended to apply himself henceforward to *doux* *commerce*[5]

Karl and I send our heartiest thanks for the articles, and the three little ones[6] send their love.

Yours

Jenny Marx

Our Edgar[7] is said to be loafing about in New York again and to be coming here and then going on to Germany! What a band of loafers!