---
id: MECW39-306
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, September 9, 1853"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: "Jenny von Westphalen"
written: "9 September 1853"
year: 1853
publication: "First published in *MEGA*, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

JENNY MARX TO FREDERICK ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London, 9 September 1853]

Dear Mr Engels,

Imandt was here just now and told us that Dronke was studying Spanish and he *believed* he had seen him with the little grammar, 'the one that was sold'.[1] If, dear Mr Engels, you could question Dronke about the wretched little book as soon as you receive this letter, Karl would be much obliged to you; for we might thus be able to clear the matter up to the confusion of Isegrim[2] before he leaves. To you it may seem funny that we should make a thing of this stupid business, but one must have experienced the whole thing to understand it—such crude, boorish tones, such churlish behaviour, such brutal shouting, such outbursts and anger in front of myself and the children. It would be splendid if the sold booklet were in the hands of a bosom friend! But do not mention Imandt's name. It is already very late and I am addressing these lines to your house to make sure they reach you tomorrow. More pleasant news. Bamberger is threatening to take proceedings over the Swiss affair.[3] Schabelitz has asked him to sue my husband because of a passage in a letter in which Karl promised to pay half the expenses if the thing sold. Please send the letter which you still have in the file.[4] Karl likewise begs you yet again to let him have the notes about the Russian and Turkish troop deployment.[5] He is continually having to write about the business since it hasn't yet been settled, and the Americans are besotted with the EASTERN QUESTION.

Today Karl has been forcing himself to write another long article on economies[6] and, being very tired, has asked me this evening to take up the pen on his behalf.

Farewell, and warmest regards from us all.

Jenny Marx

Lupus, or so we hear, is leaving tomorrow morning. He has not said good-bye to me and the children.