---
id: MECW39-275
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 16, 1855"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "16 May 1855"
year: 1855
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 16 May 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

My wife is most unwell; the household in general still very upset. From the day we left Manchester[1] the weather here has been unremittingly awful.

Dronke, the little fool, refuses to send you the Bruno Bauer[2] until you have sent him his 'rubbers'. The Petermann[3] got packed by mistake. Would already have been returned to you if I hadn't wanted to send it at the same time as the Bruno Bauer. Tell me how you wish it done. If you send the little fool his shoes, you might at the same time send me the Decker, which I forgot.[4]

I have written to Breslau.[5] No answer yet. In the meantime write and tell me in greater detail how many sheets—whether in separate volumes or ALL TOGETHER—, charges, etc.[6]

At long last a few more *Tribunes* from Cluss, together with a couple of lines in which he indicates that he will be writing.

Herewith 1. *The Sunday Times* on the 'Soho scorpions'. 2. A cutting from *The People's Paper*[7] in which you may read about Mr Jones' curious negotiations with the City reformers,[8] and 'how he was brought down' (clearly the chaps wanted to have the working plebs standing *in* the street *outside* their doors as mere super- numeraries, just for SHOW and to demonstrate their movement's popularity). The business is VERY CURIOUS INDEED.

Regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.

The *Political Fly-Sheets*[9] have now come out as a book. In the foreword Mr Tucker thanks me *by name*[10] which, with an Aliens Bill in the offing, is NOT QUITE RECOMMENDATORY.