---
id: MECW39-012
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Freiligrath, January 26, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 January 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published in part in *Die Neue Zeit*, Ergänzungshefte, No. 12, 12 April, Stuttgart, 1912 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in Engl"
status: raw
---

MARX TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH

IN LONDON

[London,] 26 January 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Freiligrath,

The verse you sent me to have a look at is delicious and expresses the *corpus delicti* in a masterly manner, but I believe it impairs the effect of the whole.[1] *D'abord*,[2] is Kinkel a 'German poet? I and a great many other *bons gens*[3] venture modestly to express some doubt upon this point. Then: will it not detract from the significant contrast between the 'German poet' and the 'commercial' Babylon to deal yet again with the contrast between the 'free' and the 'servile' poet? The more so as the relationship of the puffed-up *man of letters* to the world that confronts the 'poet' is already depicted exhaustively in *Andersen*.[4] Since, as I see it, there is no intrinsic need to bring in Kinkel at this point, your verse would only provide our opponents with the opportunity of coming down on it as the expression of personal pique or rivalry. But as it is so felicitous and ought not to be wasted, you will—if you agree with my view in other respects—certainly have a chance of using it in a different context, in one of the later poetical letters. For the sketch is delicious.

Since Engels-Weerth have not returned the copy of your first poem[5] which I sent them, all I had to offer red Wolff[6] yesterday were the few bits I knew by heart which, however, sufficed to bring on one of his fits of enthusiasm.

*Quant à notre ami*[7] Ebner,[8] he has undoubtedly had letters from Pieper, the best proof being that Pieper possesses a reply from him. Besides, he wrote him another long letter quite recently, excusing my silence on the grounds of my indisposition.

I have had a letter from Bermbach consisting of some 30 lines. He asks why he has not heard from me for so long. The answer is quite simple. I send about half a sheet to Cologne and, after a very long delay, receive in return a few lines, none of which ever answers my questions. For instance, never a word about Daniels' state of health and the like. You will get this letter as soon as it comes back from Manchester. Engels is going to use it for articles for the English papers.[9] There is nothing of importance in the scrawl save the following: The Board of indicting magistrates, *remarquez le bien*,[10] in view of the fact 'that there was no actual evidence of an indictable offence', rules that the investigation must start *all over again*. First then, on the basis of some stupid presumption, you have to spend 9 months in jug. Next, it transpires that there are no legal grounds for your being in jug. Conclusion: You must remain in jug until the examining magistrate finds himself à *même*[11] to present 'actual evidence of an indictable offence' and, if the 'actual evidence' is not forthcoming, in gaol you remain until you rot.

Such shameless poltroonery is unbelievable. The main fault lies with the wretched 'Press' which utters not a word. A few articles in the *Kölnische Zeitung*, the *National-Zeitung* and the *Breslauer Zeitung*—and the Cologne Board of indicting magistrates would never have dared do anything of the sort. But the liberals and democrats, like the curs they are, rejoice at the removal of their communist rivals. Did we not stand up for the Temmes and every imaginable variety of democratic riff-raff whenever they found themselves in conflict with the police and the courts?[12] Not once does Kinkel, for whom Becker was a hearth and Bürgers a haven,[13] render them any thanks in the *Lithographische Korrespondenz* which he sustains with American funds. *Les canailles!*

If I knew of a safe bourgeois address in Cologne, I would write to Mrs Daniels and endeavour to reassure her to some extent about political conditions. From what Pieper tells me, it would seem that every counter-revolutionary advance is exploited by the 'worthy citizens' to alarm and vex her.

Enclosed a note from Miss Jenny to Master Wolfgang.[14]

Kind regards,

Your

K. M.