---
id: MECW39-248
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, October 25, 1854"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 October 1854"
year: 1854
publication: "First published abridged in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Literature and Art. Selections from Their Writings, N. Y., 1947, p. 134 Published in English for the first time in full in Marx-Engels Collected Wor"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS[1]

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 26 October 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

While studying the Spanish muck I have got to the bottom of the worthy Chateaubriand—a style-specialist who combines in the most repellent manner the refined scepticism and Voltairianism of the eighteenth century with the refined sentimentalism and romanticism of the nineteenth. *Stylistically'**,***** of course, such a combination was bound to be epoch-making in France, though even the style has an element of spuriousness which, for all his clever tricks, frequently leaps to the eye. As for the *political* man, he has exposed himself utterly in his *Congrès* *de* *Vérone'****?*[2] and the only question is whether he received 'cash' from Alexander Pavlovich[3] or whether he was bought simply by FLATTERY to which the conceited fop was more susceptible than anyone else. AT ALL INSTANCES he received the Order of St Andrew[4] from Petersburg. Everything about M. le 'Vicomte's' (?) *vanitas'**,***** notwithstanding his now Mephistophelian, now Christian coquetting with *vanitatum* *vanitas'****.[5] You will remember that, at the time of the Congress, Villèle was Louis XVII I's Prime Minister and Chateaubriand French envoy in Verona. His *Congrès* *de* *Vérone'**,* which you may at some time have read, contains documents, transactions, etc. Begins with a short history of the Span, revolution of 1820-23. As for this 'history', all I need tell you is that he transfers Madrid to the banks of the Tagus (merely so as to quote the Span, saying that this river *cria* *oro*[6] *)* and tells us that Riego led *10'**,'**000* *men* *('**realiter*[7] *

only 5,000) into the field against the 13,000 under General Freire; that Riego, having been beaten, withdrew with *15'**,'**000* men. In order to compare him with the hero of La Mancha,[8] he sends him to the Sierra Morena instead of the Sierra de Ronda. This I mention *en* *passant* as characteristic of his manner. Hardly a date that is right.

The best part of the joke, though, is Mr Chateaubriand's doings