---
id: MECW39-255
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 15, 1854"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "15 December 1854"
year: 1854
publication: "First published in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

To Engels in Manchester

[London,] 15 December 1854

28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

I have just received your note and very much look forward to seeing you here in a week's time.[1]

Article received.[2]

Barthélemy's end is a GLORIOUS one.[3] At yesterday's hearing (or rather CORONERS INQUEST) it was said that important papers, though not relating to the assassination, had been found on him.[4] It would be annoying if these included papers from the old days, so that we seemed to be connected with a fellow who—or so the louts boasted—was 'saving up' a bullet for us in the event of our returning to Paris.

I haven't read the Bauer, so bring it with you.

Next week I start writing for the Neue Oder-Zeitung. 30 talers a month for the time being. I suppose, however, that the fellows will be satisfied with three articles a week. Not having the money to buy books, I cannot possibly bid adieu to my studies at the Museum[5] in return for 30 talers a month. Much though I dislike the thing, I've accepted it for the sake of my wife's peace of mind. Her PROSPECTS, of course, are GLOOMY.

What I particularly approved of in Ripley[6] was his not giving way to enthusiastic hyperbole. The strategic mistakes made in the Mexican War would seem to be self-explanatory in view of the total absence of plan. As for the nicer tactical blunders, I, OF COURSE, understand nothing of such matters. I should think that he took Napier[7] for his model, to judge by the way he depicts the Mexicans just as Napier does the Spaniards, and in the second place strives after FAIRNESS towards the opponents.

Tomorrow I shall be saddled with Blind and wife. This 'shinishter' Russophobe and 'repelbican' still insists that Baden is the real land of the future.

Salut. And give my regards to Lupus.

Your

K. M.