---
id: MECW39-168
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, June 9, 1853"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "9 June 1853"
year: 1853
publication: "First published in *MEGA*, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 9 June 1853

Dear Marx,

So that Pieper may see he hasn't been forgotten, inform him of the following. In yesterday's *Manchester Guardian* there was the offer of a post as CORRESPONDING CLERK AND BOOKKEEPER. He might contrive to get £180 a year; from what I hear, it is with a Jew here, Leo Schuster. Pieper should at once write a letter addressed to:

Box B 47,

Post Office,

Manchester

and beginning: Monsieur, etc.

The letter had best be written in French, since French and German are required. He should say he thinks he can fill the post, that he comes from Hanover, is aged such-and-such, and last worked for so-and-so in London, from whom inquiries may be made as to his character and qualifications. He can conduct correspondence in German, French and English and, if needs be, in Italian, is rather less familiar (if indeed this is the case) with bookkeeping; he must say that he lost his post because the partner's son had joined, etc., then what sort of a business it was, but that he could without doubt quickly familiarise himself with all types of merchandise business in the Manchester TRADE. *Le tout sans phrase, aussi simplement raconté que possible.*

*J'ai l'honneur de me souscrire*,[1] or else, *Mr., votre très dévoué*, etc. Nothing more. If they consider him, he will probably be summoned to Schuster's London house, and then it will be up to him. But he *must write straight away, by the first post tomorrow.*

Herewith £1. 18. 6d., the balance of the £32. The fellow only deducted 18 pence for collecting charges but, on the other hand, all Charles[2] and I owed him.

You will have received the bill from America the day before yesterday.

Whether Pieper can give Rothschild as a reference, you people in London will be best able to judge; if so, it might do no harm, for the fact that Pieper is no BRED CLERK will emerge at the very first interview when they ask him where he worked before. But he must be sure of what Rothschild is going to say and, perhaps, see him beforehand.

Your

F. E.

*Copie d'Annonce*[3]

[To refer to me would do *no good whatever*, indeed it might do harm. Pieper, of course, should not let Schuster see that he knows *who* inserted the advertisement to which he should refer as his reason for applying.]