---
id: MECW39-071
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, July 22, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "22 July 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published in part in Russian in *Voprosy istorii KPSS*, No. 3, Moscow, 1962 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow, 1962 Published in English in full f"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ADOLF CLUSS

IN WASHINGTON

[London,] 22 July 1852

understand the case they are, *legally speaking*, in an exceptionally good position but, as you will know, before a jury the moral standpoint is all important, and in this respect there can be no denying the danger for some of the accused. For the principal defendants, Röser, Bürgers, Nothjung and Reiff, have given away far too much: they have admitted a connection with specific tendencies over a definite period; have talked of the enrolment of new members attended by certain formalities and pledges, and other such things, which in themselves, however, do not constitute a crime, but may, depending on circumstances, have an adverse effect on the jurymen, most of whom belong to the peasantry, particularly when there is such evident lack of respect for God and landed property. Grave difficulties will also arise in connection with the defence; the advocates know nothing about such matters, most are hostile on principle and dread the thought of the ten-day sitting fixed for the case. It should not be forgotten that, on the occasion of the Assizes, proceedings will be taken *in contumaciam*[1] against F. Freiligrath, at present in London. So Freiligrath will shortly be able to parade round London as a German poet who has been beheaded in effigy.—

'P.S. I have just read the bill of indictment which contains no less than 65-70 pages. If they're convicted, these people have only their own statements to blame. I doubt there can be any more consummate jackasses than these working men: Reiff made statements that were almost regular denunciations, and various others behaved no less ineptly. Small wonder that the fellows were so much harassed; the longer they have been held in solitary confinement, the more satisfactory statements they made. That aside, facts don't come into it.'

*Voilà* our Straubingers,[2] it's tough that world history should have to be made with people such as these...