---
id: MECW39-060
title: "Letter to Joseph Weydemeyer, May 28, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels
written: "28 May 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

MARX AND ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

Manchester, 28 May 1852

Dear Weiwei,

I am staying with Engels for a few days and have found your letter here. Today you must be content with a few lines.

The main purpose of this letter is to inform you about three individuals who will be arriving in America:

1. *Heise* (of the Kassel *Hornisse*), *Willich's agent* (who, unbeknown to Kinkel with whom he is on bad terms, is seeking to spread *Willich's* renown). Apropos. Mr Willich was among the *cavalière servante*[1] of Baroness von Brüningk who, once a week, provided him, Techow, Schimmelpfennig, etc., with free board. The Brüningk woman is a flirtatious little woman and it amuses her to tease the old he-goat, who plays the ascetic. One day he made a direct carnal *attaque* upon her and was ignominiously shown the door. Keep an eye on Heise and don't trust him out of your sight.

2. *Schütz* from Mainz. Kinkelian. Member of the Committee for the Administration of the European-American National Loan.[2]

3. *Conrad Schramm*. He has in his hands a credential from us, so worded that *without you* he cannot take a step. In his relations with his brother[3] and the latter's other friends, his conduct has not always been beyond reproach. The confidence you accord him should not be *unconditional* but rather *tempered with caution*. In the adverse circumstances here he has, furthermore, gone very much *downhill*, is quite unreliable and not over-scrupulous in moneymatters, tends to swagger and boast like a *commis voyageur*[4] and hence may well compromise those in his surroundings. On the other hand he has a number of good qualities. I feel it my duty to put you *au fait* in advance. You should also pass on this information to Cluss.

As to Lupus' letter, you should not take it too literally. Wolff wrote in a moment of agitation and is very well aware of the many obstacles that stood in your way.[5]

Don't forget to send me in your next a detailed report on 'Willich's Corps'[6] in New York.

My warm regards to your wife. I hope that, 'for all that',[7] your affairs will yet progress.

Dana has written to say he wants to do an essay on the Cologne people[8] as soon as you provide him with the necessary information. So go and see him. The Cologne people are to appear before a special Court of Assizes in June. Daniels is said to have consumption and Becker[9] to be half blind. Mind you settle the matter quickly with Dana and send me the article. It will provide consolation for Mrs Daniels.

Your

K. Marx

Dear Weydemeyer,

As regards Heise, I first met him in the Palatinate. A democratic loafer who lends a willing ear to bad jokes about Tom, Dick or Harry, but a no less willing hand to Tom, Dick or Harry's pompous, democratic schemes for world conquest and world liberation. Recently—since his arrival in London—he has consorted exclusively with the others, never coming to see us; now, of course, wholly in the others' clutches. No time for any more. Greetings to your wife.

Your

F. E.