---
id: MECW39-202
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 5, 1854"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "5 January 1854"
year: 1854
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929. Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collecte"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 5 January 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Since the day you left,[1] the whole FAMILY has been prostrated by influenza, etc. Musch and I are still very much down. Thus through physical causes I have already been cheated of 3 articles for the *Tribune* which, considering the weather, is *dur*.[2] Let me know if you can provide me with *one* article for next week, on any subject you like. But I must know for certain *if* and *when*.

Being still confined to my room, I have not, of course, been able to keep up with the newspapers. Pieper tells me that in today's *Morning Herald* there is a long article on the Russian plan of campaign[3] The main theatre to be Asia, not Europe. They proposed to take Constantinople from the direction of Asia Minor (!) etc., etc.

Three volumes of Joseph Bonaparte's *Memoirs*[4] have so far come out. The third contains the old Napoleon's correspondence on the Peninsular campaign.[5]

Just now I was interrupted by Musch, who is raving and thrashing about, etc., in a high fever. I hope the little man will soon recover.

[6]

Received a letter from Dana on Monday. Unable to print the article under my name[7] as it would damage the 'prestige' of the paper. Your military articles have created a great stir. A rumour is circulating in New York that they were written by General Scott.[8]

Adieu,

Your

K. M.