---
id: MECW39-005
title: "Letter to Joseph Weydemeyer, January 16, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "16 January 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "Source: *Marx Engels on Literature and Art*, Progress Publishers, 1976 Published in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39, p.7 This letter was published in English for the first time, slightly abridg"
status: raw
---

*To Weydemeyer in New York*

**28 Dean Street, Soho**

Dear Weydemeyer,

Today I got up for the first time in a fortnight. From this you will see that my indisposition—not yet wholly overcome—was a serious one. Hence, even with the best will in the world, I could not send you No. Ill of my article on Bonaparte[1] this week.

On the other hand, I enclose a poem and a private letter from Freiligrath. I now request you to do the following: 1. Have the poem printed properly with reasonable spacing between the stanzas. Do not try to save space. Poems lose a great deal if they are printed in a cramped and conglomerate fashion. 2. Write Freiligrath a friendly letter. You do not have to be too sparing with compliments, for all poets, even the best ones, are plus *au moins* [more or less] *courtisanes* and *il faut les cajoler, pour les faire chanter*. [one must cajole them to make them sing] Our F[reiligrath] is the most amiable, unassuming man in private life, who beneath his real *bonhomie* conceals *un esprit tres fin et tres railleur;* [an extremely keen and scornful mind] his emotion is "truthful" and does not make him "uncritical" and "superstitious." He is a genuine revolutionary and an honest man through and through — and this can be said of few men. Nevertheless, whatever kind of *homme* he is, the poet needs praise and admiration. I believe that the genre itself requires this. I am telling you all this simply to point out that in your correspondence with Freiligrath, you should not forget the difference between the "poet" and the "critic." It is, by the by, very nice of him to address his poetical letter directly to you. I think that this will be helpful to you in New York.

I do not know whether I shall manage to send you another article today. Pieper had promised me to write an article for you. Up till this moment he has not yet turned up and when he does, the article will have, to be put to the test—i.e. whether it is consigned to the flames, or is considered worthy of crossing the ocean. I am trop faible encore1 to go on writing. More today week.

Regards from my family to yours.

Lupus is still not fully recovered and hence has not yet sent anything.

Your

K. Marx

Apropos. Enclosed is yet another 'statement' from a member[2] of our League[3] which you should insert in your paper in small print among the advertisements or below the line. Daniels, Becker and Co. have again not been brought up before the January Assizes on the pretext that the investigation was so difficult that it must be begun all over again.[4] They have now been in jug for 9 months.