---
id: MECW39-058
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 22, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "22 May 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA*, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engel"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London] 22 May [1852] 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

The first half of the 10-pound note arrived this morning. I intend to leave here on Friday,[1] this time by ship to Liverpool and thence to Manchester.

Apropos. Citizen Schramm[2] is travelling to America via Liverpool. Well, the fellow proposes, or so he confides to us, to descend upon you on Wednesday or Thursday. You must see if you can give him the slip.

Willich has had a rather nice adventure. Mrs von Brüningk, who provided him with free board, used to enjoy flirting with this old he-goat, as with the other ex-lieutenants. One day the blood rushes to the head of our ascetic, he makes a brutally brutish assault upon madame, and is ejected from the house with éclat. No more love! No more free board! *Nous ne voulons plus de jouisseurs.*[3]

Cherval, about whose heroism before the Paris Assizes in the matter of the *Complot allemand-français*[4] ^14S you will have heard, has, as you may also have seen in the English papers *(Morning Advertiser)*, escaped from the catchpolls in prodigiously daring manner—as it later transpired, with the connivance of the police to whom he betrayed everything he knew. Even the Great Windmillers[5] were forced to throw out the hero with whom they had been parading round London.

The Cologne people have at last been referred by the Board of indicting magistrates to the Court of Assizes. Unless a special Court of Assizes is appointed, they will not appear before July.[6]

Dronke sends his regards.

Your

K.M.