---
id: MECW39-024
title: "Letter to Joseph Weydemeyer, February 19, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "19 February 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

Manchester, 19 February 1852

Dear Weydemeyer,

To my intense surprise I see from your letter of 6 Feb. per the *Arctic* that not one of my letters to you has arrived. I have sent you 4, if not 5, articles on England[1] and only desisted a fortnight ago because I had heard absolutely nothing from you: my last article went by the STEAMER which left on Saturday 31 Jan. from Liverpool, and concerned the REFORM BILL to be anticipated from little Russell. The first 2 letters were addressed to Mr J. Weydemeyer, Deutsche Vereinsbuchhandlung, William Street, New York; the others to Mr J. W., 7 Chambers' Street, New York (City). Since this matter requires investigation, I am sending you this through Marx whose letters, it seems, are reaching you; I would ask you, 1. to go to the above places and see whether the letters were presented there; 2. if not, to go and inquire at the N. Y. CITY POST OFFICE. If they are not to be found there, advise me by the first Liverpool STEAMER and I shall see what further steps can be taken here; I can easily get the thing into the newspapers over here if the local postmaster fails to give me a satisfactory answer. I posted several of the letters myself, the rest went with the business mail, and that proves that they were properly attended to, since all our business letters have arrived. Take these steps, I beg you, without delay, for otherwise there is little point in my sending you any more articles when the *Revolution* comes to life again.

Make sure you send us L. Simon's *Tribune* article,[2] either a cutting—giving the date of the issue—or the whole issue in a wrapper, since that sort of thing is always good reading.

My address is still the same.

Your

F. E.