---
id: MECW39-293
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, December 12, 1855"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "12 December 1855"
year: 1855
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition*, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published "
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 12 December 1855

Dear Marx,

Something can be arranged with the good *Tribune* people after all, you see, and the £200 are assured. So that a start can be made straight away, I shall do a military article this evening, then you must do a political one. Both of them can then go on Friday,[1] *hoc facit*[2] *£4*. I return Dana's letter herewith.[3] *Au fond*,[4] it is all to the good that the noble Mirbach has settled down to a life of idleness in London, for after all nothing has been definitely settled with the New Yorkers about the Crimean articles.[5] At all events, I am now relieved of any indirect obligation to the chap, and *il ne me regarde plus*.[6] I have said nothing at all here about the matter, otherwise it would give Lupus qualms of conscience in the end, and next time he would turn rebellious.

Jmeyer[7] wrote to me recently, not so much to inform me that he was still awaiting a letter from you, as to let me know what to say at my brother-in-law's[8] at Christmas. He has heard nothing at all from the little man.[9]

We shall bear in mind Mr Karl Joest and his caricatures. I believe I shall do an even better caricature of him when he is dangling from a lamp post.

Whether I shall be able to do an article on Tuesday[10] depends, of course, on events, which are now very few and far between. Kars and Omer Pasha will have to be my victims today; if anything happens tomorrow I shall add it on.[11]

The STRIKE is going ahead here. The MASTERS said that they were willing to pay, provided the Ashton rates were taken as a basis. The HANDS replied that if the MASTERS chose Ashton, they would choose Oldham and be prepared to accept as a basis the average for the two places. Thereupon the MASTERS gave an evasive answer and proposed yet a third place in the district as a norm. This was refused and there the matter rests. The HANDS seem to me to be completely in the right; but they obviously still have in mind a few old trade union traditions whereby only this or that machine may be operated and only in the specific, time-honoured manner. But they'll soon drop this rubbish. The neighbourhood is beginning to support them.

The editor of the *Guardian*, whom I've come to know, is a wise man IN HIS OWN MIND and a kind of oracle in the eyes of a number of philistines; apart from that a teller of dirty stories and a moderate carouser. He has obviously heard about me for, whenever I mention some shabby trick, he listens with attention and asks questions which show a desire to know. I shall gradually encourage the man's advances and then draw him out about the people on the *Examiner* *and* *Times*, after which I shall approach the latter rag. *Après, on avisera*[12]

Warmest regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.