---
id: MECW39-021
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, February 17, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "17 February 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 17 February 1852

Dear Marx,

You will be furious with me for being so cursory, but I'll be damned if I know whether I'm coming or going, what with all this work and COMMERCE. *Voici les faits*:[1] 1. Charles[2] has gone to Germany and has left me not only with all his own work, but also with a nice little residue of tasks left undone at the year's end; 2. Last year's balance sheet shows a *definite loss* for my old man which may be a good lesson for him, but means that I am inundated with an unholy mass of vexations, calculations, and jobs of various kinds; 3. One of the Ermens[3] has given notice of termination and you can imagine the intrigues and correspondence which that brings in its train. Enough: this evening I shall be stuck in the office until 8 and, instead of being able to write to you at greater length, still have to write a letter to my old man and take it to the POST OFFICE before twelve o'clock tonight; tomorrow evening I must do something for Jones[4] and the day after tomorrow I shall see to it that I finish an article for the *Tribune*.[5] For the present there can be no thought of spare time before 7 or 8 in the evening, and the worst of it is that, for some time to come, I shall have to devote my whole attention to filthy commerce, otherwise everything will go wrong here and my old man will cut off my SUPPLIES.

You will have received the *£2*. I hope to hear from you soon, even if I don't have sufficient leizure to answer your last letter at length.

According to today's *Daily News* Louis Napoleon is certain to exhume Kaspar Hauser and to claim succession to the throne of Baden through his Aunt Stephanie. *Voilà de grandes nouvelles pour le citoyen Seiler dont l'étoile va se lever incessamment*.[6] Could you not persuade Kaspar Hauser's great historian[7] to write to Louis Napoleon and offer him his important sources on this matter? *Il y a là de quoi faire un grand coup*.[8]

Your

F. E.

How is it that Weydemeyer sends no word? If a letter doesn't arrive by the *Arctic* tomorrow morning, I shall despair; something must have gone wrong. So far as I know, he has not written since 5 January, or at least I have heard nothing.