---
id: MECW39-217
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, April 19, 1854"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "19 April 1854"
year: 1854
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

London, 19 April 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

In Cluss' letter, enclosed herewith, you will note on the one hand Schimmelpfennig's admiration of your military stuff—for which I am given the credit; on the other, his crafty critical reservations.[1]

Should today's report (in *The Times*) from Gorchakov and the report in the *Northern Bee* on the manoeuvres on the Circassian coast[2] give you occasion to send me a LETTER for the *Tribune*, you might drop a few anonymous remarks about Schimmelpfennig's opinion which, by the by, is commanding much attention.

What is the significance of *The Times* suddenly ceasing its attacks on the ministry (*quant à la guerre*)?

You will see from the American newspaper cuttings that for six months the 'Central Committee'[3] —of this I received private confirmation yesterday—had had a considerable amount of money at its disposal. The letter from Karger—Ledru's famulus— in the *Pionier* shows how Ledru, and with him the entire orthodox emigration, are deceiving themselves as to the significance and future prospects of this same Ledru. He and the Germans have agreed that as soon as he is Great Khan of France, he will order a French army—but under the German command of Ruge-Blind-Goegg—to invade Germany.

Enclosed also a map of Constantinople which may be of interest to you.

Schily is off to Paris with official permission. He will represent the 'house' over there and Cornelius here.

Bangya is in Erzerum—colonel, of course—is called Mohammed Bey, has had himself circumcised, and embraced the Koran. Possibly sent to General Guyon as a spy.

Damned lovely weather. A pity one can't make better use of it. According to a letter received yesterday from Trier, Edgar[4] is leaving Texas on a six months' trip to London and Germany.

Your

K. M.

I can see that this letter will be too bulky, so shall send the cuttings in my next.