---
id: MECW39-008
title: "Letter to Joseph Weydemeyer, January 23, 1852 (Marx)"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "23 January 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

[London,] 23 January 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

Unfortunately my indisposition has up till now prevented me from writing to you this week, i.e. for your paper.[1] *With* *much* *effort* I concocted an article for Dana,[2] who had received nothing from me for six weeks or more. For years, nothing has so pulled me down as this damned haemorrhoidal complaint, not even the last French fiasco.[3] *Enfin*,[4] I shall be all the better for having been forcibly kept away from the library[5] for 4 weeks, hard though this was.

You will be getting two more articles about the 18th Brumaire,[6] of which the first will be dispatched, come what may, on Friday next and the other immediately afterwards, if not at the same time.

Enclosed Pieper's article.[7]

As for Lupus, I have been chivvying him a great deal and he seems to have made up his mind to take a retrospective look at Kossuth's Hungarian *carrière*[8] for your paper. You have made two mistakes, first in failing to name Lupus along with ourselves in your announcement,[9] and secondly in *not* *approaching* him *direct*. Make good the *second* with a letter which you may enclose in one to myself and in which you urge him to write. No one else among us all has his popular style. He is *extrêmement modeste*.[10] All the more must one avoid giving the impression that his cooperation is regarded as superfluous.

Because I live some distance from Freiligrath and because I received Pieper's article only just before the post left, we have today been compelled to send you *two* letters instead of *one*. This will be avoided next time.

Enclosed another statement from my friend *Pfänder* (Bauer no longer belongs to our League). You will have to publish it, since the Windmill Streeters' statement against him appeared in both the *American* and the European papers.[11] It would be a good idea if, beneath this statement, you were to print the comment that it contains *only* what could be published under *present* *police* *conditions* (the accounts between Bauer and Pfänder on the one hand and the former League on the other, further, the control exercised by the *Central* *Authority* over the administration of those monies, we being in the majority on the C.A.—none of these things can, of course, be published *yet*); that, counting on the political precautions we, for our part, have to take in Germany, Arnold Winkelried Ruge,[12] that old gossip and 'Confusius'[13] of European democracy, made an allusion to those matters (i.e. those of Pfänder and Bauer) about which he himself knew only from hearsay at 3rd or 4th hand, in the hope of incriminating *myself* and *Engels* in the eyes of the public, although the business was no concern of ours,[14] in just the same way as the jackass suggested that it was the Windmill Streeters who threw *us* out when it was *we* who had broken with that society,[15] as Pfänder's letter also implies.

You might also announce that a *new* *workers** *****society* has been formed in London under *Stechan**s* chairmanship,[16] which will keep aloof from 'Emigration', 'Agitation'[17] and Great Windmill Street alike, and pursue a serious line.*

*Tu* *comprends*, *mon* *cher*,[18] that this society belongs to us, although we only send our younger people there; I refer to our *jebildeten*[19] people, not to our workers. They all go there.

*Stechan* has about him something of the solidity of a guild brother and the fickleness of a small master-artisan, but he is educatable and has considerable influence in Northern Germany. That is why I have also called on him to provide contributions for you.[20] We have BY AND BY pushed him into the foreground, which he likes to shun, and into contradiction, which he likes to gloss over. Willich had asked him to guarantee Kinkel's loan[21] but he refused. At first enthusiastically welcomed by Schapper and Willich, and set against us by them, he was soon enabled by his better nature to see through the shabbiness and hollowness of these fellows and their following. And so (with a little help from Lochner and other assistants with whom we had provided him incognito) he openly broke with the rabble.

Is A. Hentze our Hentze from Hamm? If so, I would write to him, for as it is Willich has done everything to blacken me in his eyes. *L'infâme*![22]

Warmest regards from my family to yours.

Your

K. Marx

I am sending material for pamphlets, etc., all in *one* *batch*, likewise Jones' *Notes*.[23] Sent piecemeal, they cost too much. *The* *Northern* *Star* is no longer in O'Connor's hands but in those of a Chartist faction which is secretly in touch with the Financial and Parliamentary Reformers.[24]