---
id: MECW39-283
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 7, 1855"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "7 August 1855"
year: 1855
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow, 1962 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 7 August 1855 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

The FAMILY (hence, for the most part, myself also) still in Camberwell. Pieper came and stayed with us for a week. I was thus prevented from writing, save for the necessary pieces for New York AND GERMANY. The article on the 'ARMIES' is splendid.[1]

From the enclosed letter from Steffen you will see what a bad state our friend Daniels and Bürgers are in. I am particularly sorry about the first. I don't know whether, in my résumé of the report by the visitor from Yankeeland,[2] I mentioned that Conrad Schramm is consumptive and is taking a cure of ass's milk *chez* former Field Marshal Blenker.

In the past weeks I have sent the *Tribune* a series of articles—i.e. 3—about Lord John Russell in which the little man is passed in review from the very beginning.[3] However, it will soon be necessary to say SOME WORDS about the war and also, perhaps, about how the *affaire* is going in Asia.

Dronke has suffered a bitter disappointment. For it eventually transpired that the issue of a passport to Paris had been due to a misunderstanding on the part of the French Embassy; rather, express instructions had been given that he was not to be admitted into France. In a few days it will be decided whether or not he has obtained a post in Jersey.

Bonaparte has, within the bounds of pure reason, solved the problem I set him, namely 'to steal the whole of France in order to make a present of it to France again'.[4] His manoeuvrings over the loan are significant experiments in that direction.

What do you think of the Austrian concentration of troops in Italy? Have you seen the 2nd *Mémoire d'un Officier Général*?[5]

Your

K. M.