---
id: MECW39-109
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, October 18, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "18 October 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 18 October 1852

Dear Marx,

Herewith the remainder of the recent[1] article.[2] Yesterday I also received the next one.249 You can at once dispatch VIA LIVERPOOL PER UNITED STATES MAIL STEAMER the piece I am posting you today; the *Pacific* sails on Wednesday morning. You will be getting some more on Friday.[3]

You really must stop making your articles so long. Dana cannot possibly *want* more than 1-1½ columns, it would be too much for one number. I shall again have to split this new article, but it's difficult to do and I don't yet know where. Five-7 pages in your wife's handwriting is *quite* *enough* and if you give more in one article, Dana won't even thank you for it.

Bürgers and Röser, and perhaps Otto and Nothjung likewise, seem to me pretty well done for. There doesn't appear to be anything at all against Daniels, Becker[4] or Jacobi, and I hope that these at least will get off. Becker has extricated himself with great effrontery. The more these are exonerated the greater, I think, will be the zeal with which the judges and jury will set about the compromised men; the injured bourgeoisie and the injured State want their victims.

The edges of the seals on all the letters I am getting from you show signs of having been gone over with a hot iron but, so far as I can judge, *pour le roi de Prusse*.[5] The gum on the envelope prevents them from getting inside.

Weerth is here, has brought me the parcel, and sends his regards to you all. Szemere's manuscript on Kossuth is far better than the one on Görgey—he's a match for Kossuth. I have not yet been able to look at Pieper's translation,[6] being very busy at the office and dog-tired most evenings. Warmest regards to your wife.

Your

F. E.