---
id: MECW39-144
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 10, 1853"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 March 1853"
year: 1853
publication: "First published considerably abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 Published in English in full for t"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 10 March 1853

Dear Engels,

Received the £5. This week I was within an inch of kicking the bucket. From hepatitis, or something very similar. This is hereditary in my family. My old man[1] died of it. During the 4 years I have been in England there hasn't been a sign of the thing and I thought it had gone for good. But now the worst is over and, what is more, *sans médecin*![2] But I am still somewhat knocked up.

Yesterday I received the following **pleasing** letter from Basle:

'Basle, 7 March 1853. 9 o'clock in the morning.

Dear Marx,

I have just heard that the whole consignment of *Revelations*,[3] amounting to 2,000 copies, which has been lying in a village on the other side of the border for the past 6 weeks, was intercepted yesterday while being conveyed elsewhere. What will happen now, I do not know; first of all, a complaint lodged by the Baden government with the Federal Council, then, no doubt, my arrest or at least commitment for trial, etc. In either case, a terrific shindy! This briefly for your information; further communications, should I be prevented from making them myself, will reach you through a third party. When writing to me, address the envelope: "Mad. Brenner-Guéniard, magasin de modes, Basle" and, on the sealed enclosure for me, simply write "For Jacques". I shall deposit the manuscript on the *coup d'état*[4] in a safe place. Adieu. Before long, I hope, I shall be able to tell you more than I now know. Let me have a safe address; yours and Bamberger's are probably known.

Yours

Jacques[5]

Well, *qu'en pensez-vous, mon cher maître renard*?[6] Has the 'Suisse'[7] sold me to the Prussian government for cash? 6 weeks in a village on the other side of the border, the affectation of fear, not a word