---
id: MECW39-146
title: "Letter to Bertalan Szemere, March 10, 1853"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "10 March 1853"
year: 1853
publication: "First published in the journal *Magyar Tudomany*, No. 4, 1978 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

MARX TO BERTALAN SZEMERE

London, 10 March 1853

I have received your last lines. You will have read Kossuth's various statements.'[1] Even before Mazzini's statement[2] was published I knew that he [Kossuth] had written a most *embittered* *private* *letter* about Kossuth to one of his friends here, an Englishman.[3] In connection with this I wrote the following to the *Daily New-York Tribune*:[4]As Mr Mazzini himself has now broken the ice I may as well state that Kossuth disowned his own document[5] under the pressure of his Paris friends. This is not the first symptom, in Kossuth's past career, of vacillating weakness, inextricable contradictions and false duplicity. He possesses all the attractive virtues, but also all the feminine faults, of the *Artist* character. He is a great artist *"*en paroles*"*.'[6] I recommend Mr Szemere's lately published biographies *Batthyâny*, *Görgey* *and* *Kossuth* to those who, unwilling to bow to popular superstition, are anxious to form a matter-of-fact judgment.' I *sign* all my articles. Attacks will now follow, so I shall have an opportunity to go deeper *en matière*.[7] I should be obliged if you would communicate to me in good time any news you hear about the emigrants, particularly as regards the *par nobile fratrum*,[8] With a couple of pieces of such information I can always buy myself the right to deal with the *matter itself* in the *Tribune*.

*Quant à*[9] Zerffi, whom I have not seen for a fortnight, I told him at any rate that if I knew Kossuth personally I would have felt it was my duty to warn him against Bangya. It seems to me that Zerffi is talkative and somewhat indiscreet. But I do not by any means believe that he is to be placed on the same level as Bangya, but that he is much more honourable.

2,000 copies of my *Revelations Concerning the Cologne Trial* (sent to Switzerland on 6 December 1852)[10] were *confiscated* on the Baden border 3 months later. I am convinced that Bangya had something to do with that too. *C'est un infâme qu'il faut écraser*![11]

Pulszky went to America about 4 weeks ago. I think Kossuth sent him there to restore the renown he has lost with the Press and to intrigue against his *opponents*. Pulszky will try to get me too a bad name with the *New-York Tribune*, but I prophesy no great success for him.

I remain yours most respectfully

Ch. Williams