---
id: MECW39-204
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 18, 1854"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "18 January 1854"
year: 1854
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 18 January 1854
28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Frederic,

You must let me have by Friday[1] something of a general nature (it is hardly possible to be specific) about the Battle of Citale or Zitale.[2] It seems to me that:

1. The battle of Oltenitza was a *misunderstanding* which frustrated the armistice imposed by the Ambassadors on the Porte. Similarly the Battle of Citatea[3] was a *misunderstanding* which frustrated the peace proposals dictated to the Porte under the guns of the English warships.

2. The obverse of Oltenitza. In the one case the Turks entrenched, in the other the Russians, etc.

3. Same result. After a murderous set-to lasting five days, the fellows drew in their respective horns. All I see is the result. I don't know what *should* have happened. All I do know is that this is not the way *Napoleon* fought a war.

So enmeshed in their own webs have the diplomatic intriguers become that a *guerre générale* is imminent. As you know, the EVENT AT Sinope—not to mention Mr Redcliffe's threats—was intended to induce the Turks to accept the Protocol of Vienna and bring Halil and Riza Pasha into the government.[4] Once all this had been engineered, Palmerston resigned.[5] On 19 December, *while* he was still out of office, the coalition smelt a rat and ordered a demonstration in the Black Sea. Palmerston, doubly discredited, returned to office and effected the decision of the 26th, that the *entire* fleet was to sail into the Black Sea, but to do no more than assume a *neutral* role vis-à-vis the two BELLIGERENTS; ostensibly going further than the decision of the 19th, but in fact attempting to thwart it and cut the Turks off from their Asiatic theatre of war. In the meantime, however, Mr Bonaparte, basing himself on the decision of the 19th, has already issued contrary orders and purports to *interpret* the decision of the 26th merely as an extension of the first. Palmerston, OF COURSE, had to make the best of a bad thing and preserve his reputation as an energetic patriot. In this way the fellows have got themselves into a pretty pickle and their *dissimulation* will land them in an even worse one, especially since Parliament will have to be shown on the 31st that 'energetic' steps are being taken. The Note which the fellows submitted to the Turks for signature shows that the former were prepared for a total SURRENDER TO RUSSIA and that only 'misunderstandings' frustrated this good intention.[6]

My brother-in-law—*le ministre*[7] —wrote and told my mother-in-law[8] that she was unfortunately about to relive her experience of 40 years ago, namely a general war.

I forwarded your letter to Steffen[9] the same day to Brussels where Steffen is still staying with his sister. I fear that, at this particular juncture, your 'Napoleon as Lieutenant of Artillery'[10] will be *rejected*, as *The Times* has had orders to refrain from any semblance of anti-Bonaparte polemics. Since he is 'our' ally, every paper will be moved by the same patriotic considerations just now. Anyway, as soon as the thing is ready, and if the papers won't have it, we shall bring it out as a pamphlet. Where my own work is concerned, I feel embarrassed about offering it to a publisher. The same *gêne*[11] would not apply to yours.

That jackass Weydemeyer has again shelved 'the noble consciousness'.[12] The main thing was speed in answering. 6 weeks too late, and the thing's SILLY. I cannot understand Cluss, and why he should always pick on me of all people to be Mr Weydemeyer's victim.

Your

K. M.