---
id: MECW39-171
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, June 29, 1853"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "29 June 1853"
year: 1853
publication: "First published in part in *Die Neue Zeit*, Bd. 2, Nr. 31, Stuttgart, 1906-07 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow, 1962 Published in English in full for t"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 29 June 1853
28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

My sister,[1] and her newly wedded husband[2] who is sailing from here to the Cape of Good Hope as a GENERAL DEALER, have unexpectedly descended on me. This, combined with the work for the *Tribune* and some unpleasantness to be cleared up in America, has made considerable demands on my time. The couple set out tomorrow, I believe. I hear from Imandt that your mother is expected in London, from which I conclude that you, too, will turn up soon.

Enclosed Lassalle's instructions for the dispatch of the copies[3] to Germany. My wife will undertake their dispatch to Manchester. I hope that you people will then take care of the matter up there. Haven't you seen anything of Jones? He's roaming about in your part of the world and is said to have brought off a MONSTER MEETING in Halifax.408

Last Wednesday, much to my astonishment, I received a very peevish letter from Cluss, in which he said someone had written telling him that Pieper had described him to Schläger—him and Arnold—as 'subordinate agents', and himself, on the contrary, as the one who supplied news 'at first-hand', etc., etc. Fortunately there isn't *a word of truth* in the whole thing, which is merely an attempt by Willich, Anneke, Weitling and Co.'s party to sow dissension amongst our own ranks, and, more particularly, to neutralise 'that most unpleasant man, Cluss'. The necessary explanations were, of course, dispatched across the water at once.[4] I am unable to find Cluss' first letter, but enclose the 2nd.

Before leaving for Manchester[5] I borrowed £2 from the little Jew Bamberger. The fellow keeps sending me strongly-worded reminders, if not threats. *Mais nous verrons*.[6] By Friday I shall have £20 to draw on New York. But again the question is how?

Enclosed the *nee plus ultra*[7] of Heinzen's now sanguinary cowardice and aversion to 'ordinary methods of warfare'.[8]

I was mistaken about the 'Swiss article', Dana having divided the thing into two parts,[9] but published both under my name.

Until next time, then. My worthy sister and brother-in-law have just come in. My sister is very stout and will sweat damnably while crossing the Equator.

Your

K. M.