---
id: MECW39-308
title: "Letter to Joseph Weydemeyer, December 12, 1853"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: "Adolf Cluss"
written: "12 December 1853"
year: 1853
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, Second Russian Edition, Vol. 28, Moscow 1962 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

ADOLF CLUSS TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

Washington, December 12th 1853

Dear W.,

Herewith 1 article 'from Wisconsin';[1] I think you'd be well advised to bring it out in two parts, with 'to be continued' in between.

Just received 1 letter from Marx, *dated 28TH NOV*. Dronke, it seems, has sent you a statement which you should hold back if it is not already too late.[2] Dronke was supposed to send this statement to Marx in London, instead of which he sent it to you in New York.

Marx has answered Willich at length,[3] in very learned, 'Hegelian' fashion. Splendid, so far as I can see, and plentifully buttressed with documents; I shall probably send you the thing tomorrow, but haven't yet had time to read it through, and so do not know what to do with it. *It is voluminous*. 20 pages of LARGE NOTE-PAPER. Marx had already written it when my letter arrived informing him that we were taking care of the answer.[4] He now considers that, since it isn't every day one meets with such a lying codger as Willich, it would be RATHER DISAGREEABLE if the thing had to be shelved. He authorises me to make deletions if his article repeats what we have already said, or conflicts with ours in matters of detail.

More about this when I send you the thing. The accompanying letter, dashed off in great haste, partly by Monsieur and partly by Madame Marx,[5] concludes as follows:

'Yesterday evening (27TH Nov.) the Waschlapskis and Schelmufs- kis[6] held a meeting.[7] Harney was IN THE CHAIR. The PEOPLE almost tore him to pieces. DOWN, DOWN, RASCAL, TRAITOR, RENEGADE, and he wasn't permitted to TAKE THE CHAIR. PEOPLE jumped onto the platform, everyone was belabouring everyone else, the Schelmufs- kis acted as Harney's GUARDS.'

Again: 'As regards the *Reform*, Karl has done everything in his power. Pieper, driven by necessity, has gone to work in a French SHOP, where he sells sunshine, i.e. the newly-invented *lampe réverbère*![8] He *cannot* write just now. Accordingly Karl has roped in Heise and given him a subscription to the reading room since he hadn't got the required penny. He has also written to Germany asking for help.'

Treat the bit about Heise as confidential.

Your

Ad. Cluss