---
id: MECW39-076
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, August 5, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "5 August 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels "
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 5 August 1852
28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Don't forget to let me have the *rest of the thing*[1] by *Tuesday*. The section on the Tories is too short by itself. This time there is a twofold reason why the portions sent to Dana should not be too niggardly. 1. In Cincinnati that blackguard Heinzen is siding with the Whigs against the Democrats, because he rightly believes this ELECTIONEERING TIME is the best moment at which to sell himself. *Greeley* reported in the *Tribune* the speech Heinzen made there, and went on to praise the man.[2] So storm clouds are threatening *me* from that quarter. 2. Having for weeks, and particularly for the past fortnight, been forced to spend 6 hours a day chasing after 6d for grub, on top of which I am again being pestered by my LANDLADY, I had no other alternative but to write to Johnson yesterday inquiring whether he would discount a bill on the *Tribune* for me. Should the man agree to do what I ask, which is still *in dubio*,[3] I shall have to inform Dana, and if we send him short articles, he will think he is being fleeced and will cast me out of the temple, since he now has such a plentiful SUPPLY from Heinzen, Ruge and B. Bauer. What is even more unfortunate, I see from today's *Times* that the *Daily Tribune* is protectionist.[4] So it's all VERY OMINOUS. We must send the fellow something as quickly as possible before he countermands. I can't yet send off my dispatch[5] since I have a frightful headache—not, however, from the effects of PALE ALE. It's regrettable that Dronke will not be here on Saturday.[6] Goegg has called a *general* meeting of refugees for that day and the little man's presence would have been very desirable. For Pieper isn't the right person. At all events, Dronke must see to it that he is here when the rabble arrives from Berlin, for I cannot cope with these blackguards all by myself.

I have all manner of stuff from Cluss, too, to send you, which you will receive as soon as you send me a few STAMPS; otherwise the trash will cost you double and *pour le moment*[7] I haven't a penny to send.

*Salut*.

Your

K. M.