---
id: MECW39-034
title: "Letter to Joseph Weydemeyer, March 25, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "25 March 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published in English for the first time, slightly abridged, in *Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Letters to Americans. 1848-1895*, International Publishers, New York, 1953 Published in English in"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

London, 25 March 1852 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Weydemeyer,

Good luck to the new world citizen! There is no more splendid time to enter this world than the present. Come the day when people can travel from London to Calcutta in a week, both our heads will long since have rolled or started to loll. And Australia and California and the Pacific Ocean! The new world citizens will be unable to comprehend how small our world once was.

If you did not receive the final instalment[1] enclosed herewith a week ago, your total silence is to blame.

Now in the pamphlet,[2] too, I would like my article to be divided up as it was sent to you, under headings I, II, III, IV, V, VI, VII. These figures serve as sign-posts for the reader. They take the place of titles. At the end of V, add the following words: 'But Bonaparte answered the Party of Order as Agesilaus did King Agis: "*I seem to thee an ant, but one day I shall be a lion.*"[3] But the thing must, of course, be brought out now all at once in its entirety.

Where my wife has failed to leave space enough to indicate the paragraphs, I have marked them with a T.

Cluss' statement[4] is splendid. Why not—it strikes me as a good idea—*include Ernest Jones' letter in your first issue?*[5] A couple of introductory words would suffice to explain it.

*Maintenant*: Cluss will already have told you about the Szemere business. First a publisher will have to be contacted through me and arrangements made for his pamphlet—some 10 sheets—on Kossuth, L. Batthyâny and Görgey—to be brought out in German and later in English. You might, if it can be managed, publish the German original as your second instalment without, of course, any other additions. But the publisher must pay for the thing if you don't publish it yourself.

When this has been arranged—and perhaps even before that—the *Revolution* will receive 500 dollars from this source, on condition that Bangya comes in as co-editor, i.e. only in the sense that part of the paper is allotted to the *Hungarians* and run by Bangya, Szemere's agent. But you'll have no difficulty in getting on with him, *car il est bon homme*.

I am very glad to hear that you have found employment as a surveyor. You will be able to operate with greater confidence and peace of mind.

One of these days I shall be starting on Mazzini. Whereas Mr Kinkel, whose wisdom, by his own admission, derives from nursery tales, now chooses to see nothing but unity among the 'great men', he finds on his return the battle raging *optima forma*.[6] For Ledru and Mazzini have bought the Brussels daily *La Nation* for 10,000 fr. drawn from the Italian loan. *Mais voilà que il Signore Mazzini* looses off an opening article, in which he vents all his infamous anti-French, anti-socialist inanities about the initiative lost by France, and this so wildly that Ledru now feels compelled—and has, it seems, made up his mind—to take issue with him personally. On the other hand, the socialists L. Blanc, Pierre Leroux, Cabet, Mallarmet, etc., have joined forces and published a venomous retort composed by dear little L. Blanc. At the same time the majority of the French émigrés are violently incensed against Ledru, whom they rightly hold responsible for Mazzini's stupidities. Fire has broken out in the very midst of their camp.

Should you happen to get hold of *Der Tag ist angebrochen*, a book by that miserable cleric, Dulon, who fancies himself as a Lamennais, mind you give the cur a good dusting.

Dronke has been arrested in Paris where he lingered too long on his way here from Switzerland instead of hurrying through.

I like your selection very much. Pieper's article[7] might do well enough for a newspaper. For a pamphlet it was dashed off too hastily and perfunctorily.

Can you not get news of Edgar[8] from Braunfels? We have heard nothing from the lazybones and this is causing his mother[9] great anxiety. A crazy lad!

Cluss' protest[10] was greeted with general applause at the League meeting here, and both we and Stechan's society[11] found your *Revolution* to our liking. Warm regards from my family to yours.

Your

K. M.

In case the infamous reply from Willich's society to Pfänder's statement should appear in some paper or other (e.g. Weitling's)[12], I am sending you Pfänder's 2nd statement.

What can red Becker be doing? Has he, too, become a Kinkelian?

Apropos. Some of the engineering workers have come to their senses and sent apologies to Jones. By now the English workers have collected sufficient money for Jones to bring out a big STAMPED weekly in addition to his *Notes*.[13] The jackass who is to convey these to you has still not left.[14]