---
id: MECW39-162
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, May 21, 1853"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "21 May 1853"
year: 1853
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in *MEGA*, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Ma"
status: raw
---

MARX TO ENGELS

IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 21 May 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Today the bill for £25 goes off to Freiligrath, who will immediately notify Lièvre of its receipt.[1]

Herewith Wolff's[2] address; he is still sulking. By the by, now that so much has been brought out into the open, I have become convinced that Dronke has been purveying the most abject lies, rumours and gossip at my expense. The only activity, indeed, of which this self-important midget and WOULD-BE Blanqui was capable. His addiction to tittle-tattle had turned him into such a dyed-in- the-wool liar that he himself no longer knew what he was saying or had said.

Don't for God's sake send me *any more* copies of Weydemeyer's statement or my own.[3] Here alone I have 14 of each which I received the day before yesterday. It would have been more to the point had Weydemeyer sent at least 2 or 3 copies of 'Hirsch's' revelations. E.g., Schabelitz could make use of 1 in Switzerland should further proceedings be taken against him. I like the inevitable Weydemeyerian misprint, where Bangya is made to say *Ähnliches* instead of *Rühmliches*.

Nothing else of interest here. I have not seen Blind recently. Have you sent him his Herzen?[4]

*The People's Paper* is on the up and up and, for the time being, financially secure. Jones is convening mass meetings for 19 June *et seq.* at Blackstone Edge, Skurcoat Moor, Mount Sorrell and Nottingham Forest.[5]

Apropos. I was only able to give Pieper 10/-, Strohn having shown me the wrong RAILWAY GUIDE which caused me to miss the PARLIAMENTARY TRAIN,[6] so that I had to travel 2nd class.

Write to me soon.

Your

K. M.