---
id: MECW39-185
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, September 29, 1853"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "29 September 1853"
year: 1853
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] 29 September 1853

Dear Marx,

Herewith the article on the Turkish armies.[1] If you tell me what you are sending tomorrow on the STRIKES in Lancashire and the STATE OF TRADE,[2] I shall be able to link on to that and let you have a further REPORT on these matters by Tuesday.[3] The local MANUFACTURERS and MERCHANTS are at great pains to convince one another that things are not too bad, and the *Guardian* does what it can, but it's ALL SHAM AND HUMBUG. Since last week ordinary yarns are down by between 1/2d and 3/4d per pound, i.e. at 9d a fall in value of 3-4 1/2%, at 8d of 3-6%, at 7d of 4-7%; in the same period COTTON fell by about 1/8. STOCKS are accumulating and the HOME TRADE DEMAND is also falling off. There has been such frightful overspeculation in the Australian trade that 80,000 barrels of American flour were reconsigned *to this country* from Australia at a freight charge of 8/- per barrel. In 4 weeks' time the Australian CRASH should be well underway. All that the 'good news' from India amounts to is that the rise in prices over there and the fall in prices here added together still leave a loss on exports to that market. Nothing is flourishing save TRADE with America and speculation in corn. In Uxbridge, *80/- per quarter* is already being paid for first quality wheat. CORN LOOKING UP, YARN LOOKING DOWN, and the Turkish rot IN THE FAIREST POSSIBLE WAY OF BORING OUR MERCHANTS ALL WINTER OVER.

MANUFACTURED GOODS are also coming down smartly, and here STOCKS are far more catastrophic than in the case of yarn. The manufacturers' decision to stop work thus kills two birds with one stone: 1. it disarms the workers, 2. it cuts down production. The fellows in Preston are sure to receive a general vote of thanks, if not compensation.[4] In Ashton, Stalybridge and Glossop, the manufacturers are also considering a stoppage, and some here as well. However there is a snag to it, namely that it only benefits those who don't stop, and only harms those who do.

If Borchardt is to be believed, Lupus has some prospect of obtaining a post as corresponding clerk. The old gent is studying Russian and the like and is as enthusiastic as ever over the Turkish question, of which I wish him joy.

My regards to your wife and children.

Your

F. E.

What do you think of Jacobi's melancholic and virtuous views about the end of the world?[5]