---
id: MECW39-256
title: "Letter to Moritz Elsner, December 20, 1854"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "20 December 1854"
year: 1854
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

MARX TO MORITZ ELSNER

IN BRESLAU

London, Wednesday, 20 December 1854 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Eisner,

Your letter arrived here on Monday. I myself only got back today after spending a few days visiting Engels and Lupus in Manchester.

[1][2]

I shall begin work as correspondent on *Saturday*. To start off right in the middle of the *final part* of the 'preliminary' parliamentary session WOULD NOT DO. A *resume* of this short session would make a better *entrée*. For the past two years I have been writing—i.e. for publication—only in English. German may give me some trouble at the start.

As you are aware, I edited a Prussian newspaper[3] *under censorship*—for a whole year. So I am quite familiar with the torments which the *Neue Oder-Zeitung* may have to endure under a new form of censorship, and it is these difficulties, the UNDERHAND struggle AGAINST THE ESTABLISHED POWERS which incline me to work in the interest of this paper.

So far as I am aware, and I know pretty well all the important reading-rooms in London, the *N.O.-Z.* is not available in any of them. Hence, for the time being, you'll have to send it direct to me. I might perhaps be able to introduce it into a reading-room or

COFFEE-ROOM.

You would particularly oblige me if, by way of an exception, you could send me *one* issue of the *Breslauer Zeitung*. Although Edgar Bauer comes to see me every week, he has never spoken about his articles and I would like to get to know his views from one 'sample'.

Since Parliament will be going into recess, and—save for a *resume* of its sessions and PERHAPS of FINANCIAL MATTERS—there will be little of importance to report, I shall, if these premises hold good, write a number of consecutive articles providing a review of the conduct of the war in the Crimea so far,[4] concerning which I have seen nothing sensible, i.e. critical, either here or from Germany. Moreover, I suppose that this subject is of the greatest general interest and at the same time least liable to lead to a conflict with the indirect Royal Prussian Censorship.

Requesting you to convey my kindest regards to your wife whom I have not had the pleasure of meeting.

Yours

K. Marx