---
id: MECW39-002
title: "Letter to Joseph Weydemeyer, January 1, 1852"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "1 January 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "First published abridged in *Letters to Americans. 1848-1895. A selection*, International Publishers, New York, 1953 and in full in *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 Published in "
status: raw
---

To Joseph Weydemeyer[1] in New York

[London,] 1 January 1852

Dear Weiwi,

A happy New Year to you, and greetings to your wife[2] from myself and wife.

I have not been able to send you the article until now,[3] having been interrupted not only by events coming one on top of another but to an even greater extent by private affairs. Henceforward, I shall be regularity itself.

Lupus[4] has fallen seriously ill and hence has not yet been able to send anything. Red Wolff's[5] article seemed to me unusable, hence I did not send it off.[6]

If, *which I hope will not happen,* your undertaking[7] has to be postponed for any length of time on financial grounds, *let* Dana *have* the article so that he may translate it into English for his paper.[8] However, I hope this will not be necessary.

Give Dana my regards. Tell him I have received his newspapers and his letter and shall be sending him a new WORK next week.[9] As for the *Revues,*[10] since they are not ready to hand but have to be obtained at some expense and trouble from Hamburg, please let me know roughly how many sales you think I can count on in America.[11]

I shall be sending you from here *Notes to the People* by our friend Ernest Jones, the most important leader of the English party; you should find them a veritable mine when it comes to filling the gaps in your paper.

Send me at once (and in future regularly) a few copies of your weekly.

Greeting and fraternity.

Your

K. Marx

Yesterday I hammered away at Freiligrath for all I was worth and he promised me to concoct a poem for you on the most recent occurrences.[12]