---
id: MECW39-156
title: "Letter to Joseph Weydemeyer, April 26, 1853"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "26 April 1853"
year: 1853
publication: "First published in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

MARX TO JOSEPH WEYDEMEYER

IN NEW YORK

[London,] 26 April 1853 28 Dean Street, Soho Dear Weydemeyer,

On 21 April I received the anonymous scrawl set out *below*. An identical anonymous letter was sent to the democratic tavern- keepers, Schärttner and Göringer. *I have* *ASCERTAINED* *the* *facts* *contained* *therein*. I think you should publish the thing (you may name Schärttner and Göringer) along with a few introduc- tory remarks dated London. Messrs Stieber and Goldheim have come over here in order to *link* Kossuth's apocryphal gunpowder plot with the Berlin affair.[1] From the following you will note to what extent the 'contrite' Hirsch continues to be 'A Victim of Moucharderie'.[2] Let us hope the blackguard doesn't succeed in finding fresh victims in Berlin. I think this business will prove his complete undoing in America. Cluss will have received what follows below at the same time as yourself. We were all very taken with your 2 articles in the *Reform*.[3] Only see to it that Kellner doesn't exploit you without a fitting *quid* *pro* *quo* in terms of political influence. Well, here is a *word-for-word* copy of the letter received by Schärttner, etc.:

'London, 21.4.53

Announcement

Recent arrivals: Police Commissioner Stieber and the Jew Goldheim, a police lieutenant, both of Berlin.

*Description*

*Stieber* *the* *Jew* *Goldheim* Medium height (about 5') about 6' Hair: black, short black, short Moustache: ditto, ditto ditto, ditto Complexion: sallow and muddy sallow, puffy features Wears dark, narrow trousers, a blue Wears black trousers, a light yellow sack,

sack, a collapsible stuff hat, and black hat. spectacles.

N.B. Both of them regularly go about together and are accompanied by *Hirsch*, a commercial assistant from Hamburg, and *Haering*, a one-time postal clerk from Willich's birth-place. Today Stieber and Goldheim had a meeting with Bangya. Stieber or Goldheim visit the Prussian Embassy regularly every day between 11 and 3.'

Today's *Times* reports the presence here of Stieber and Goldheim.[4]

Many regards to you and your wife.

Your

K. M.

As that fire-eater Heinzen has again had the audacity in his *Volk* to invoke the 'Chartists'—who simply want universal suffrage without having to bother their heads over communists or odious class distinctions, I think it high time you published in the *Reform* the letter written to you by Ernest Jones.[5]