---
id: MECW39-251
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 22, 1854"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "22 November 1854"
year: 1854
publication: "First published abridged in Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in: Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXII, Moscow, 1929 Published in "
status: raw
---

To Engels in Manchester

London, 22 November 1854

28 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Engels,

Received the £2 YESTERDAY.

Herewith letter from Dana which will show you what use the HUMBUGS are making of the military material. The book he mentions by Ripley on the MEXICAN WAR hasn't reached me yet.[1] I shall have it fetched tomorrow, leaf through it and then send it on to you.

If you possibly can, send an article on Friday,[2] since I wrote about Spain on Tuesday[3] and, under PRESENT CIRCUMSTANCES, this can't be done twice in one week. On the other hand, to miss an article in my very difficult financial situation would be bad from every point of view.

No sooner had the false rumours of the fall of Sevastopol arrived than His Honour, Public Prosecutor Blind, hit on the plan of holding a German meeting—which was also to be made the occasion of a declaration of principles—against Russia and the German 'prinches' and, more particularly, ad majorem gloriam)[4] of the Public Prosecutor himself and the German emigration in corpore![5] It was an occasion on which the 'chiefs' of all factions were to foregather PEACEFULLY. I and Freiligrath, of course, beat off this attack, so that at first Blind's plan was frustrated. Mais comme les grands esprits se rencontrent,[6] the same thing had occurred to the indefatigable Arnold Ruge—who is presently dumping all manner of rubbish in The Morning Advertiser—and, at his written invitation, a preparatory meeting took place, COMPOSED OF: Vittinghof (chiropodist; 60 years old, a Courlander speaking no known tongue; formerly servant to Count Vittinghof of Courland, now posing as his own master. This Vittinghof, according to Arnold's plan, was to take the chair; a gang of German merchants (Gerstenzweig, etc.) were to provide the money and call the meeting and, under their auspices, German refugees were to be let loose on the platform). Römer (Becker's stepfather and a notorious mouchard[7]. Meyen. Buchheim. Ronge. Ruge, Blind. Geck.[8] —The upshot of the meeting was that Geck and Ronge more or less 'called each other out'. Public Prosecutor Blind indignantly withdrew from the meeting because Dishcloth Ruge refused to include in the programme the phrase 'republic which unites us all'. Afterwards Blind called to see me—I was out—and complained 'bitterly' to my wife about the 'contempt' in which the 'German emigration' was held, and about our preventing any 'concerted' action. As if any of us were preventing the 7 or 8 jackasses from 'uniting' or 'demonstrating'. (However, if the fellows should cause a stir with their meeting and unduly compromise 'Germany' by licking English boots, it was our secret intention—as yet unknown, by the by, to Staatsrat Blind—to enlist the aid of the London Chartists and perhaps hold a rival meeting.)

As you can see, the 'Great Men of the Exile' are once again of the opinion that something 'has got to be done'.

In this connection Blind also then told my wife that 'Baden alone had had the courage to proclaim a republic' etc., etc. No other news.

Your

K. M.