---
id: MECW39-176
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, August 24, 1853"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "24 August 1853"
year: 1853
publication: "First published in *MEGA*, Abt. III, Bd. 1, Berlin, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Wednesday, 24 August 1853

Dear Marx,

I'll send some money tomorrow if I *possibly can*. Your letter arrived on Saturday too late for anything to be done, this week there have been all sorts of complications, but tomorrow things will, I think, have improved, and our old bookkeeper has been forewarned.

The little man;[1] was here on Saturday. That he had been gossiping was evident to me from the moment he wrote to Borchardt. He had sent him Lupus' most *discreditable* letter in which the latter makes an outright and most earnest appeal to the 'generosity' of the Jews in Bradford. *C'était une lettre à brûler de suite*[2] Borchardt at once magnanimously sent Lupus alms, to wit the sum of *one pound*,—not that he wasn't very decent about it, WHICH HE COULD WELL AFFORD to be, seeing that it released him from all his obligations. I must confess that this letter of Lupus' left a *very bad* taste in my mouth, but not so bad as the little man's tactlessness in letting it fall into Borchardt's clutches. Anyway I duly hauled him over the coals for it.

*Enfin c'est fait*[3] If Lupus is going to Liverpool, see to it that he comes here first, if possible on a Friday, in which case I shall arrange a rendez-vous with the little man. If, as Dronke proposes, Lupus first goes to Bradford, the *cancan*[4] will only proliferate.

You know that Jacobi intends to go to America. The chap's altogether *trop mou*[5] and even philistines get the impression that he's a helpless sort of creature. I don't believe he'll ever obtain a practice, however much he may pine for one. Besides one can't help laughing when one remembers that the chap's still a virgin.

Your

F. E.