---
id: MECW39-230
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, June 10, 1854"
volume: 39
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 June 1854"
year: 1854
publication: "First published abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 2, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 39"
status: raw
---

ENGELS TO MARX

IN LONDON

Manchester, 10 June 1854

Dear Marx,

I was very sorry I was unable to send you an article for Tuesday's post,[1] but it was a *sheer impossibility* because of the many jobs to be done at the office which now absolutely preclude my writing articles for you precisely on Mondays or Thursdays. On top of that, my present lodgings are almost 3/4 of an hour's walk away from the post, so that nothing more can be done late at night for the second post. Hence I have to work on Saturdays and on Wednesday evenings. Tomorrow I shall send you a *comprehensive* article on the siege of Silistria[2] which ought to cause a stir; maybe, too, some notes on Napier's absurd naval frolics[3] and on the condition of the army in Bulgaria.

I am now swotting the Hungarian campaign in real earnest and shall, I think, have worked my way through all the sources by October; *come what may, I shall write the book this winter*}. The more I go into it, the prettier the thing gets on both sides. At present I am comparing Görgey and Windischgrätz,[4] and find that in his self-apology the latter is as mendacious as in his bulletins[5] he hasn't the courage to disown. Delightful, how each of the two adversaries tries to make his own army out to be worse than the opposing one. *Père* Windischgrätz, incidentally, proves himself the ass we know him to be—HE HAS ACTUALLY WRITTEN HIMSELF DOWN AN ASS—and was most ably abetted in his tomfoolery by men even more stupid, if such a thing is possible, than himself, namely his subordinate generals Wrbna, Csorich and, above all, the chivalrous Banus Jellacic. Görgey's cynicism enables him to record the facts much more frankly and correctly than that mendacious apologist Windischgrätz. However, it is a campaign altogether worthy of the year '48/49.

Cold feet on both sides, the old armies and the revolutionary forces both discredited. Next week I hope to receive the official Austrian book;[6] and one of these days I shall go through the Brockhaus catalogues to find what sources are still required. Another thing I need is Klapka[7] then I shall have all the principal stuff.

The thing for *The Times*[8] will be written next week; I now have all the sources and need only do a little more work on them. Could you find out in London what military periodicals are published there? Just in case of need.

Now I must go to the bookseller's if I am not to find it shut; let's hear from you soon.

Dronke, drunk as usual, was run over by a CAB, and is now in bed; will be confined to his room for some 8 or 10 days, otherwise nothing serious.

I shall make inquiries about Otto.[9]

Your

F. E.

I hope your wife is well again.