---
id: MECW11-021
title: "The Trials at Cologne. To the Editor of The Morning Advertiser"
volume: 11
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "6 November 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 11, p. 380; Published: in *The Morning Advertiser*, November 2, and The People's Paper, No. 27, November 6, 1852."
status: raw
---

Sir, — I beg to offer you my best thanks for the generous protection you have afforded to the cause of my friends, the prisoners at Cologne.' While the defence will bring to light the series of unscrupulous acts committed by the agents of the Prussian police, even during the progress of this trial, I wish to inform you of the last trick that has been had recourse to, in order to prove a criminal correspondence between myself and the Cologne prisoners. According to the report of the *Kölnische Zeitung*, of October 29, Mr. Stieber, the councillor of police, has produced another of his documents — a ridiculous letter, purporting to he in my handwriting, in which I am made to recommend one of my pretended agents "to push under the doors of. acknowledged democrats, at Crefeld, 50 copies of the *Red Catechism* [of Moses Hess]*,* and to choose for the execution of commission the midnight-hour of June 5, 1852."

For the sake of my accused friends, I hereby declare, —

1. That the letter in question is not written by myself.
2. That I learned its existence only from the *Kölnische Zeitung* of 29th inst.
3. That I never saw the so-called *Red Catechism*
4. That I never caused any copies of the "Red" to be circulated, in whatever manner.

This declaration, made also before the magistrate in Marlborough Street, and consequently as valid as an oath, I have sent by post to Cologne. By your inserting it in the columns of your paper, you will the more oblige me, as that would be the most effective means of preventing the Prussian police from intercepting the document.

I am, Sir, your obedient servant,

Dr. Charles Marx

London, October 30, 1852
28, Dean Street, Soho