---
id: MECW11-042
title: "List of Documents Despatched to Cologne during the Communist Trial"
volume: 11
doc_type: article
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "31 October 1852"
year: 1852
publication: "Printed according to the manuscript Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 11"
status: raw
---

Note from MECW :

This list was drawn up by Engels.— Ed.

This list of documents shows the efforts made by Marx and Engels to help the accused Communists in Cologne and their defence counsel to prove how unfounded were the charges fabricated against them by means of perjury, juggling with facts and forged material. The documents enumerated in the list were to provide the defence with material exposing the provocative actions of the police and judicial authorities. As addressees the list often mentions businessmen and trading houses which Marx and Engels used for safe dispatch of the documents to the defence counsels Schneider II, Esser I and Hontheim. Most of these conspiratorial addresses were supplied by Engels, making use of his commercial ties.

The calendar for July-October 1852 (in Engels' handwriting) at the end of the manuscript is not reproduced in this volume.

1) Brothers Braubach—Schneide r (original) October 27, business friend.

2) J.A.Boecker—Schneide r (copy) October 27, Michael Shawcross & Co.

3) I.D. Herstadt—Hontheim—t o Marx — Fisher Brothers.

4) J.H.Stein—Esse r I — to Marx—business friend.

5) Leonhar d Sadée — Schneider II—t o Marx—Smit h (Wilson) Dryer & Co.

6) Düsseldorfer Haus—Schneide r II — from London , October 25 (Marx on Cherval, theoretical explanation).[1]

7) Ebner—fo r von Hontheim — London , October 26 (triplicate of Marx's first letter to Schneider)—letters of Becker[2] and Daniels to

Marx, new samples of Hirsch's handwriting—Cherval's statement in The People's Paper—original letter from Stieber to Marx.[3]

8) G. Jung—Schneide r II. London , October 27? 1. Legally attested handwriting and affidavit. 2. Quadrupl e of the first letter to Schneider, togethe r with samples of Hirsch's handwriting.[4] 3. Extract from Becker's letter to Marx on Willich. 4. Thre e letters from Bermbach to Marx. 5. Copy of Stieber's letter. 6. Instruction to Schneider togethe r with information of the despatch of No. 9 and No. 10.

9) Schneider II, registered — Duplicate of the affidavit, October 28.

10) W. in Düsseldorf—Schneide r II — Registration certificate on No. 9, October 28.

Nos. 3, 4 or 5: one used for Schneider II. Explanation about Reuter, Stieber, Dietz,[5] October 29.

11) d. No. from B. 8c Co. von Hontheim—Extract from Marx's first letter to Schneider—Notification of the non-receipt of Schneider's letter.

12) G. Blank & Son.

13) Hasselmann Schults 8c Co.