---
id: MECW10-068
title: "Accounts of the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee in London (2)"
volume: 10
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels
written: "23 April 1850"
year: 1850
publication: "Published in the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung No. 265, April 26, 1850 (abridged); the Westdeutsche Zeitung No. 104 (supplement), May 2, 1850; the Neue Deutsche Zeitung No. 106, May 3, 1850, and the Nordd"
status: raw
---

The Committee, set up on September 18, 1849, has since its foundation supported about a hundred refugees for shorter or longer periods, and the total sum of moneys passed through its hands amounts to £161 3s 8V2d. In addition, the Workers' Society here has catered for the exceptional needs of individual refugees by collections, found work for others and put its premises with newspapers at the disposal of all refugees.

The books and receipts concerning the above accounts, which were submitted to and adopted by the German Workers' Society, are available with the Treasurer of the Committee for inspection by the donors or their representatives.

Messrs. Struve, Bobzin, Bauer (Stolpe) and others have lately seen fit to use their names to attract from Germany adequate funds for the refugees. Accordingly they have grouped around themselves a number of refugees and formed their own committee at a meeting yesterday. It goes without saying that this renewed project to form a parallel committee can no more divert us from our work for the refugees than the earlier projects which failed.

As the accounts show, the Committee's funds are so depleted that they barely suffice for the needs of one more week. But more refugees apply for support every day. We therefore call on the German social-democratic party once again not to let down their refugees and as soon as possible to send their contributions to the Treasurer, K. Pfänder,[2] 21 King Street, Soho, London.

London, April 23, 1850

The Social-Democratic Refugee Committee:

K. Marx, President,

August Willich, K. Pfänder,

Frederick Engels, Heinrich Bauer