---
id: MECW10-066
title: "Meeting of Refugee Committee on April 8, 1850"
volume: 10
doc_type: article
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "8 April 1850"
year: 1850
publication: "The minutes were written by Engels on April 8, 1850  First published in: K. Marx and F. Engels, Works, Vol. 44, second Russ. ed., 1977 Printed according to the manuscript  Published in English for the"
status: raw
---

Note from MECW :

The minutes in Engels' handwriting mirror the struggle waged by the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee, led by Marx and Engels, against attempts by Rudolf Schramm, Gustav Struve and other petty-bourgeois refugees to form their own committee and to utilise the assistance to the refugees in need for political intrigues against proletarian revolutionaries  (see this volume, p. 617).

Citizen Kleiner declares that Citizen R. Schramm has assured him that he does not belong to a refugee committee, but has merely received a number of lottery tickets from Galeer in Geneva with instructions to send the money to Geneva. The other committee meets at Hillmann's, is merely posing as a committee and, he believes, has no money.

Read, approved and signed

**W. Kleiner**

**Beyerle**

Citizen Gnam: Citizen Struve declares that he has no money for refugees. He has received a hundred lottery tickets from Galeer but has not yet disposed of them. Should he receive the money for them, he will either pay the money in to some committee that might be set up, or use his own judgment in giving the money to the refugees in return for a receipt. He regrets the splits that exist amongst the German émigrés; if these splits did not exist thousands of guilders would find their way here. For this reason he would advise the refugees to form a committee among themselves.

Read, approved and signed

**Gnam**

**Josef Leoni**

**Jakob Klein**

Citizen Struve then donated £ 1, which Gnam suggested should be given to the committee—at which Citizen Struve said: No, not to a committee, I am giving that to those who are here just now, and they are to divide it amongst themselves.

**Gnam**

**Josef Leoni**

**Lucas**