---
id: MECW10-070
title: "Accounts of the Social-Democratic Refugee Committee in London (3)"
volume: 10
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels
written: "30 July 1850"
year: 1850
publication: "Published in the Norddeutsche Freie Presse No. 425, August 7, 1850; the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung No. 280, August 9, 1850;  Der Freischütz No. 98, August 15, 1850  Printed according to the Norddeutsch"
status: raw
---

The above accounts were submitted to the meeting of the Workers' Society on July 30 of this year and were approved. Books and receipts are ready and available for inspection by the donors or their representatives.

Since in the month of June contributions received were very scanty and the need of the refugees was often unbearable, it was decided to set up a communal lodging and eating-house for them. The local Workers' Society and a section of the refugees who had already found work made it possible by their contributions to begin the execution of this plan. From funds received later the house could be provided with the necessary utensils and furniture. Up to now 18 refugees have found lodgings there and about 40 have received meals. At first the unemployed shoemakers among the refugees were used to provide their comrades with the necessary footwear. Later the Committee allocated funds and took the steps necessary to equip a common workshop for the refugees on the same premises and so to enable them to earn part of their living expenses themselves.

If the first attempt proves a success, the thing will be done on a larger scale and the public will be further informed about it at the appropriate time. The Committee expects that this double enterprise of providing aid and employment for the refugees will be supported by a great many contributions from Germany until the refugees are able to support themselves.

London, July 30, 1850

The Social-Democratic Refugee Committee:

Karl Marx, Frederick Engels, August Willich,

Karl Pfänder, Heinrich Bauer