---
id: MECW10-071
title: "About Engels' Speech at a Meeting Organised by Fraternal Democrats on September 10, 1850"
volume: 10
doc_type: article
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "10 September 1850"
year: 1850
publication: "Published in The Times No. 20591, September 11, 1850;  The Morning Chronicle No. 26139, September 12, 1850;  the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung No. 285, September 13, 1850;  The Northern Star No. 673, Sept"
status: raw
---

Note from MECW :

The meeting was organised by the Fraternal Democrats society to express their solidarity with the workers who had assailed the Austrian Field Marshal Julius Haynau (see Note 359). Reports on the meeting and Engels' speech were published in several English newspapers. The most detailed account appeared in the Reynold's Weekly Newspaper No. 5, September 15, 1850. In Germany reports on this meeting were published by the Deutsche Londoner Zeitung No. 285, September 13, 1850, which wrote the following: "Engels (former editor of the Neue Rheinische Zeitung) expressed his heartfelt thanks to the English workers for giving such a worthy welcome to their distinguished countryman (Haynau was born in Churhessen)", and by Die Hornisse No. 218, September 18, 1850.

Mr. Engels, formerly editor of a German newspaper, and who was introduced by the Chairman (John Pettie) as one who had fought and bled for freedom, addressed the meeting. He said that about thirty months ago there had been a fine lot of gentlemen sent over to England, Louis Philippe, Prince Metternich, Prince William of Prussia, and others—and foreign patriots had thought it a disgrace to England that she should so readily shelter them. But, he said, wait—the people of England, at their own time would act justly, and had done so now. (Hear, hear!) The treatment of Haynau would produce a greater effect upon the Continent than anything which had been done in England for the last ten years.

His treatment was worse than if they had torn his epaulettes from his shoulder, or broken his sword and thenceforth he would be driven from the society of his equals with contempt (Hear, hear). There would shortly be another revolution on the Continent, and the enemies of the people who would otherwise have fled to this country, would now be afraid to do so, and would go somewhere else, probably to their friend Nicholas of Russia who would perhaps give them a small kingdom in Siberia. (Loud laughter!)

In the name of his country he thanked the people of London for their treatment of Haynau which he hoped, would be imitated in any future place the monster might visit. (Applause.)