---
id: MECW10-073
title: "The Resolution of the Central Authority of the Communist League, September 15, 1850"
volume: 10
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx & Friedrich Engels
written: "15 September 1850"
year: 1850
publication: "Drawn up on September 15, 1850, with the participation of Marx and Engels  First published in the Dresdner Journal und Anzeiger No. 180, June 22, 1851  Printed according to the newspaper Published in "
status: raw
---

Note from MECW :

The text of the resolution of the London Central Authority of the Communist League, similar in content to the proposals submitted by Marx to the Central Authority meeting of September 15, 1850 (see this volume, pp. 625-27), has come down to us as part of another document—the Address of the Cologne Central Authority issued on December 1, 1850. (The Cologne Central Authority was formed early in October 1850, its members being Röser, Bürgers and Otto; some time later they were joined by Daniels and Heinrich Becker.) The Address of the Cologne Central Authority did not fully expose the reasons for the split in the Communist League and even accused both conflicting parties of violating the Rules. Even so, it unequivocally condemned the splitting activities of the sectarian and adventurist faction led by Willich and Schapper and approved the policy of Marx and his followers. In May 1851 Peter Nothjung, emissary of the Cologne Central Authority, was arrested in Leipzig. The minutes found on him were confiscated by the Saxon police and sent to the official organ Dresdner Journal und Anzeiger (No. 171, June 22, 1851) to be published as evidence that democrats and Communists were involved in secret conspiratorial intrigues. In addition, both the Address and the resolution of the London Central Authority were published in the bourgeois Kölnische Zeitung No. 150, June 24, 1851, and at a later date in the Bill of Indictment against the Cologne Communists—Anklageschrift gegen l) P.G.Roeser... [Köln, 1852] and in Wermuth-Stieber's Die CommunistenVerschwörungen des neunzehnten Jahrhunderts, Th. 1, Berlin, 1853.

1. The Central Authority will be transferred from London to Cologne and a new Central Authority will be formed by the Cologne district.

2. The existing League Rules are declared null and void and the new Central Authority is instructed to draft new ones.

3. Two districts will be formed from the existing London district. They will be independent of each other and will deal only with the common Central Authority.