---
id: MECW01-076
title: "Leaving Certificate from Berlin University"
volume: 1
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "30 March 1841"
year: 1841
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 1, pg 703-704. Publisher: International Publishers (1975) First Published: Marx-Engels-Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Hb. 2, 1929"
status: raw
---

To No. 26

We, the Rector and Senate of the Royal Frederick William University in Berlin,

testify by this leaving certificate that Herr *Carl Heinrich Marx*, born in Trier, son of the banister *Marx* there deceased, already of age, prepared for academic studies at the gymnasium in Trier, was matriculated here on October 22, 1836, on the basis of the certificate of maturity of the above-mentioned gymnasium and of the certificate of release of the University in Bonn, has been here since then as a student until the end of the winter term 1840/41, and has applied himself to the study of jurisprudence.

During this stay at our University, according to the certificates submitted to us, he has attended the lectures listed below:

I. *In the winter term 1836/37*

1. Pandects with Herr Professor v. *Savigny*, diligent. 2. Criminal law " "*Gans*, exceptionally, diligent. 3. Anthropology " " *Steffens*, diligent.

II. *In the summer term 1837*

1. Ecclesiastical law with Herr Professor *Hefter*, diligent. 2. Common German civil procedure " ". 3. Prussian civil procedure " ".

III. *In the winter term 1837/38*

1. Criminal legal procedure with Herr Professor *Hefter,* diligent.

IV. *In the summer term 1838*

I. Logic with Herr Professor *Gabler*, extremely diligent. 2.General geography with Herr Professor *Ritter*, attended. 3. Prussian law " " *Gans*, exceptionally diligent.

V. *In the winter term 1838/39*

1. Inheritance law with Herr Professor *Rudorff*, diligent.

VI. *In the summer term 1839*

1. Isaiah with Herr Licentiate *Bauer*, attended.

VII and VIII. *In the winter term 1839/40* *and summer term 1840*, none

IX. *In the winter term 1840/41*

1. Euripides with Herr Dr. *Geppert*, diligent.

In regard to his behaviour at the University here, there is nothing specially disadvantageous to note from the point of view of discipline, and from the economic point of view only that on several occasions he has been the object of proceedings for debt.

He has not hitherto been charged with participating in forbidden associations among students at this University.

In witness thereof, this certificate has been drawn up under the seal of the University and signed with their own hand by the Rector pro tem and by the Judge, and also by the present Deans of the Faculties of Law and Philosophy.

*Berlin, March 30, 1841*

*Lichtenstein. Krause. Lancizolle. Zumpt.*

Witnessed by the Deputy Royal Governmental Plenipotentiaries

*Lichtenstein. Krause.*