---
id: MECW01-049
title: "Plan of Hegel's Philosophy of Nature"
volume: 1
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "1839"
year: 1839
publication: "First published in: Marx/Engels, Gesamtausgabe, Abt. 1, Bd. 1, Hb. 2, 1929 Printed according to the manuscript Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 1"
status: raw
---

The *Plan of Hegel's Philosophy of Nature* consists of brief notes on the content of those paragraphs of Hegel's work *Encyclopedie der philophischen Wissewchaftem in Grundrisse*, 3 Aufl., Heidelberg, 1830, which deal with the philosophy of nature. These notes were made by Marx in 1839 in three versions on five pages of the sixth notebook. The first version covers 5§ 252-334 of Hegel's book and most closely reproduces the order in which Hegel sets forth his material. Marx departs from Hegel's terminology here only in separate cases. The second version covers fewer paragraphs dealing with the philosophy of nature but it is marked by greater independence in systematising the material and in terminology. Most original in this respect is the third version, which, though brief, expounds the contents of Hegel's philosophy of nature more fully than the previous ones. (Note from MECW, 1975)

[First Version]

A. General divisions. The Idea as nature is:

I) In the determination of juxtaposition, of abstract singularisation, outside which is the unity of form, this as merely an ideal being-in-self, matter and its ideal system.

Mechanics. Universal nature.

II) In the determination of particularity, so that reality is posited with immanent determinateness of form and the difference existing in it, a relation of reflexion the being-within-itself of which is natural individuality.

Ill) Singular nature. T h e determination of subjectivity, in which the real distinctions of the form are likewise brought back to ideal unity, which is self-found and for itself—Organics.

I. Mechanics

A) Abstract Universal Mechanics

a) Space. Immediate continuity; as external are:

b) Time. Immediate discreteness: T h e seen becoming: present, future and past (Now, etc.)

c) T h e immediate unity of space and time, in the determination of space. Place, in the determination of time—motion, their unity — matter.

B) Particular Mechanics. Matter, Motion Repulsion—Attraction — Gravity

1) Inert matter, mass, ... as content indifferent to the form of space and time.

External motion — inert matter.

2) Impact. Communication of motion—weight—velocity—external centre, rest, centripetence—pressure.

3) Falling. Centrifugence.

C) Absolute Mechanics or Narrower Mechanics.

Gravitation. Motion as a System of Several Bodies.

Universal Centre — Centreless Singularity. Particular Centres.

II. Physics

a) Universality in physics.

b) Physics of particular individuality.

c) Physics of singular individuality.

[Second Version]

Mechanics

a) Abstract Mechanics

1) Space. Height, breadth, depth. Point, line, surface.

2) Time. Past, present, future.

3) Place. Motion and matter (repulsion, attraction, gravity).

b) Finite Mechanics

1) Inert matter. Mass as content. Space and time as form, external motion

2) Impact. Communication of motion, weight. Velocity, external centre, rest, centripetence. Pressure.

3) Falling.

c) Absolute Mechanics. Gravitation

The various centres

II

Physics

a) Physics of universal individuality

α) Free bodies

1) Light (luminaries).

2) Rigidity (moon). Dissolution (comet).

3) Earth.

β) Elements

1) Air.

2) Fire. Water.

3) Earth.

𝛾) Meteorological Physics

b) Physics of particular individuality

1) Specific weight.

2) Cohesion (adhesion, cohesion, etc. Elasticity).

3) Sound and heat.

c) Physics of total individuality

α) Form

1) Brittle pointedness, coagulating fluidity.

2) Magnetism.

3) Crystal.

β) Particular form

1) Relation to light. Transparency, refraction, metallity, colour.

2) Relation to water and fire, smell, taste.

3) Electricity.

[Third Version]

a)

1) Space, 2) time, 3) place, 4) motion, 5) matter, repulsion, attraction, gravity.

b)

1) Inert matter, 2) impact, 3) falling.

c)

Gravitation, real repulsion and attraction.

II

a)

α) 1) Luminaries. 2) Lunar and comet bodies. 3) Terrestriality.

β) Air, Fire and water. Earth.

𝛾) The meteorological process.

b)

1) Specific weight. 2) Cohesion. 3) Sound and heat.

c)

1) Magnetism. 2) Electricity and chemism.

III

a)

a) Geological nature.

b) Vegetable nature.