---
id: MECW01-036
title: "Announcement of the Rheinische Zeitung"
volume: 1
doc_type: article
author: Karl Marx
written: "18 March 1843"
year: 1843
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 1, p.376 First published: in the *Rheinische Zeitung* No. 77, March 18, 1843"
status: raw
---

After the publication of the rescript of January 21, 1843, which suppressed the *Rheinische Zeitung* as from April 1, 1843, Marx directed his efforts to secure its repeal. Neither the refutation of the charges against the newspaper (see this volume, pp. 361-65), nor the petitions of the inhabitants of Colgne and other dries of the Rhine Province in defence of the paper succeeded in shaking the government's decision. At the end of January 1843 Marx was already thinking of resigning the editorship (see letter to Ruge of January 25, 1843, p. 397 of this volume), but he did not consider it possible to carry out his intention at the height of the campaign for the repeal of the ban. In March, however, he believed that changes in the editorial board could provide a chance of saying the newspaper, and made up his mind to resign officially from his post. He handed over his duties to Dagobert Oppenheim. Marx was probably prompted to do so also by his unwillingness to take upon himself the responsibility for a possible change of line of the newspaper by which the liberal shareholders wished to prolong its existence.
Notwithstanding Marx's resignation, the royal rescript was not repealed. The last issue of the newspaper appeared on March 31, 1843.

The undersigned declares that, owing to the *present conditions of censorship,* he has retired as from today from the editorial board of the *Rheinische Zeitung*.

Cologne, March 17, 1843

Dr. Marx