---
id: MECW38-239
title: "Letter to Joseph Weydemeyer, December 19, 1851"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "19 December 1851"
year: 1851
publication: "First published abridged in *Die Neue Zeit*, Bd. 2, No. 29, 1906-07 and in full in: Marx and Engels, *Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934 An excerpt from this letter was published in"
status: raw
---

To Joseph Weydemeyer in New York

[London,] 19 December 1851

28 Dean Street, Soho

DEAR Weydemeyer,

The day before yesterday I received your letter, sent on to me by Engels.

First, my best New Year wishes to your wife[1] and yourself. Ditto from my wife.

I am at this moment sitting here working on an article for you. Your commission arrived too late for me to be able to carry it out today. On Tuesday (23 December) the following will go off to you

1. *Der 18te Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte* by K. Marx. 2. *Der Staatsstreich in Frankreich* by F. Wolff. 3. *Nemesis* by Wilhelm Wolff. *Engels* will send you his article—on Prussia, I believe—possibly even by today's mail. *Freiligrath* has nothing ready but authorises you to name him as one of your collaborators. We are negotiating with *Weerth*. Likewise with *Eccarius*.

You can now settle down in the United States for *du moins*[2] a year. *It* is not going to begin on 2 May 1852.

I suppose that you will hold back your first number[3] until the above articles arrive. After all, it will only make a difference of 5 days. For the following numbers you can announce a serialised work of mine, to appear article by article, namely, *Neueste Offenbarungen des Sozialismus, oder 'Idée générale de la Révolution au XIX^e siècle' par J. P. Proudhon.—Kritik von K.M.*

Write forthwith to 'Adolf Cluss, U.S. Navy Yard, Washington D.C.' We've already told him you are coming.[4] He is one of our best and most talented men and could be of the greatest use to you both generally and for the preparation and founding of your paper in particular.

Don't forget the following:

Go and see Dana; ask him to give you the numbers of the *Tribune* in which my articles appeared,[5] and send them to me *forthwith*. Hearing nothing from him, I had stopped writing, and there's been such a long interval that I must see the paper itself in order to write the sequel, which I must do, if only for pecuniary reasons.

As soon as your paper appears you must not only send it to us regularly, but let us have a sufficient number of copies so that we can send them out as samples.

*Tout a toi*[6]

K. Marx

Unless you are contractually committed, don't buy the *Arbeiterrepublik*[7] from the wretched Weitling. While you might gain 200 Straubingers,[8] you would lose a wider readership. Write only under the old name. *Règle générale.*[9]