---
id: MECW38-159
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, March 19, 1851"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "19 March 1851"
year: 1851
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38"
status: raw
---

TO MARX IN LONDON

[Manchester,] Wednesday, 19 March 1851

Dear Marx,

The business of Blanqui's toast is coming on very nicely indeed. Vidil's statement[1] with regard to Louis Blanc is priceless—the fellow branded a common liar in the eyes of France and England. Barthélémy has got himself wonderfully embroiled.—There's part of your letter I don't understand: Vidil declares: 'The committee had consisted of 13 persons, not 6.... He had been among the 6.' Who are the 6? The signatories of the first statement or, perhaps, the faction which voted in favour of reading out Blanqui's toast?[2]

The tittle-tattle among the Germans also makes agreeable reading. I saw the account of the banquet in the *Daily News*[3] —since the thing was respectable it was an occasion which even Mr Mazzini felt able to attend without embarrassment. 'General Haug IN THE CHAIR!' That fellow shows promise of becoming a caricature of General Dubourg as he was in 1830. To judge by the advertisement in *The Times*, Göhringer's Golden Star TAVERN is now very RESPECTABLE. Since I must collect together all the tittle-tattle, it might not be a bad idea to send out a patrol to reconnoitre there—*il s'en trouvera bien un qui voudra mettre son nez dans cette merde-là, même au risque d'être mis à la porte.*[4]

LAST—BUT NOT LEAST—the Willichiana[5] did a great deal to enliven my breakfast this morning. What a numskull! How he could regard Schramm's[6] letter as an answer to his first one, I really cannot conceive. But the chance of a military dictatorship in the Rhine province, without a press to plague him, *sapristi*,[7] that would be quite enough to turn the dense oaf's head. *Capitaine d'armes*[8] and sergeant, no more nor less! Social revolution by means of providing paupers' victuals for Landwehr[9] families; statistics reduced to a register of 'rations, livestock, vehicles, and troops'! This plan for revolution knocks into a cocked hat the earlier one for conquering Germany with 5,000 men. If that doesn't make sense to the Landwehr, one can only despair of humankind. 'I would take a few men with me and call upon others'—and do you know what the fellow's intention was? 'Citizen Karl Marx is called upon to present himself in Cologne within 48 hours and to take charge of public finance and social reforms under the supervision and control of Citizen Gebert. Failure to comply with this order and any contrariness or argument, as also unseemly jokes, will be punishable with death. Citizen Marx will be provided with a guard of one corporal and six men.'—And now, hearken to what this fellow says of Schapper: 'Nous ne voulons plus de jouisseurs!'[10] So even the spartan POT HALF AND HALF and the fat pig's unresisting inamorata count for sybaritism with this self-sufficient sergeant who tipples gratis. Indeed, who knows whether, if Cologne were to be besieged, the fat pig would not imitate the conduct of the noble Palafox at Saragossa who, throughout the whole of the second (the real) siege of Saragossa,[11] never put in an appearance because, together with 3-4 dissolute fellows and a crowd of whores, he was busying himself among the wine barrels in the bomb-proof cellar of a convent, and didn't show his nose until the time came to conclude the capitulation.

But to what is Willich replying in the third, jubilant letter which betrays a certainty of victory and a lack of nothing but funds? Had Schramm written him a second one, or had Becker replied to Willich's 2nd letter? *Explique-moi cela*[12] and let me know whether you need the things back yet; I'd like to keep them here for the present so that I can occasionally make what notes I want.

Speculation in railways is again reaching dazzling heights—since 1 January most shares have risen by 40 per cent, and the worst ones more than any. *Ça promet!*[13]

Your

F. Engels