---
id: MECW38-127
title: "Letter to Hermann Becker, December 2, 1850"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "2 December 1850"
year: 1850
publication: "First published: in Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXIX, Moscow, 1946. Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38, pp. 251-252"
status: raw
---

London, 2 December [1850]

64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Becker,

I know that you felt greatly offended by a letter I wrote to Bürgers.[1] However, in this letter, which was written under very trying circumstances, I had no intention of offending you any more than my other friends in Cologne. I believe that this explanation will satisfy you and that, without harking back to the past, I can proceed straight to the proposals I have to make to you.

1. You know how wretchedly Mr Schuberth has managed our *Revue*. I believe that in a few days' time he will have brought out the last two issues. I wish to continue the enterprise as a quarterly (from February onwards), 20 sheets every quarter. The increased size would allow the inclusion of more varied material. Can you undertake publication, and on what terms?

2. A friend of mine[2] has translated my anti-Proudhon piece[3] from the French into German and has written his own introduction to it. I would put the same question to you as above.

3. I have devised a scheme by which socialist literature consisting of a series of small pamphlets could be launched on the public in successive publications. A start could not be made until March. Should you be willing to undertake something of this kind, the things would be got ready in the meantime. I believe that, after its recent cheering experience of *haute politique*, the German public will by and by find itself obliged to turn its urgent attention to the real content of present-day struggles. I beg you to reply soon.

Your

K. Marx