---
id: MECW38-244
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 30, 1846"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: "George Julian Harney"
written: "30 March 1846"
year: 1846
publication: "First published in *The Harney Papers*, Assen, 1969 Reproduced from the original and published in English in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38"
status: raw
---

To Frederick Engels in Brussels

London, March 30, 1846

My dear E.,

I am your debtor for two or three letters, and I fear must have offended you by my silence, particularly through not answering before this time the one very important letter to which I shall presently more particularly allude. I am always busy, but the Polish Insurrection rising has found for me additional occupation. Night and day I have been working to rouse public feeling-not altogether without success. At length the great London meeting has been accomplished[1] -I breathe again, and devote the first moment to write to you.

I first notice a very long letter I received through *Weerth* several weeks ago, the letter was without a date. I was glad to hear of your arrangements for the publication of your *Quarterly.[2] * Has the
result answered your expectations ? When I informed my wife[3] of
your very philosophical system of writing in couples till 3 or 4
o'clock in the morning,[4] she protested that such philosophy would
not suit her, and that if she was in Brussels she would get up a
'pronunciamento' amongst your wives. My wife has no objection to the
manufacturing of Revolutions, provided the work is done on the *short*
time* system. She recommends your wives to form an 'Anti-3- or 4*
o'clock-in-the morning-Association', she will volunteer her services
as 'English Correspondent' and she thinks that *Mrs Caudle[5] * might
also be induced to join the sister­ hood.

Your speculations as to the speedy corning of a revolution in England,
I doubt. Revolutionary changes in Germany I think certain and likely
to come soon. Such changes are not less certain in France and likely
to ensue soon after the death of that old scoundrel Louis Philippe,
but I confess I cannot see the likelihood of such changes in England,
at least until England is moved from *without* as well as within. Your
prediction that we will get the Charter[6] in the course of the
present year, and the abolition of private property within three years will certainly not be realized; -
indeed as regards the latter, although it may and I hope will come, it
is my belief that neither you nor I will see it. As to what O'Connor
has been saying lately about 'physical force',[7] I think nothing
of it. The English people will not adopt Cooper's slavish notions
about peace and non-resistance, but neither would they *act* upon the
opposite doctrine. They applaud it at public meetings, but that is
all. Notwithstanding all the talk in 1839 about 'arming',[8] the
people did not arm, and they will not arm. A long immunity from the
presence of war in their own country and the long suspension of the
militia has created a general distaste for arms, which year by year is
becoming more extensive and more intense. The *body* of the English
people, without becoming a slavish people, are becoming an eminently
pacific people. I do not say that our fighting propensities are gone,
on the contrary, I believe that the trained English soldiery is the
most powerful soldiery in the world, that is, that a given number
will, ninety times out of a hundred, vanquish a similar number of the
*trained troops* of any nation in the world (I hope I shall not offend
your Prussian nationality). Wanting, however, military training, the
English *people* are the most unmilitary, indeed anti-military people
on the face of the earth. To attempt a 'physical-force' agitation at
the present time would be productive of no good, but on the contrary
of some evil-the evil of exciting suspicion against the agitators. I
do not suppose that the great changes which will come in this country,
will come altogether without violence, but organised combats such as
we may look for in France, Germany, Italy and Spain, cannot take place
in this country. To organise, to conspire a revolution in this country
would be a vain and foolish project and the men who with their eyes
open could take part in so absurd an attempt would be worse than
foolish, would be highly culpable.

I must next notice what you say about my '*leadership'.* First let
me remark that you are too hard upon O' Con. You find fault with his
'leaders'; but you say the 'week's summary' affords you
entertainment-fun. You speak as though you credited me with the
'summary', but the 'summary' is prepared by O'Connor, as you
might have known by the Irish jokes and very Irish poetry continually
introduced into the commentary. You are wrong in supposing that he
prevented my continuing the remarks on Cabet. The discontinuance was
the result first of my own neglect, and second that Hetherington has never completed the translation,[9] and I
have deferred further comment until the publication was complete. I
must do O'C. the justice to say that he never interferes with what I
write in the paper, nor does he know what I write until he gets the
paper. You have thought proper in the letter I am now commenting on to
credit me with all the revolutionary virtues. You say I am
'anti-national', 'revolutionary', 'energetical',
'proletarian', 'more of a Frenchman than an Englishman', 'Atheis­
tical, Republican, and Communist'. I am too old a soldier to blush at
this accumulation of virtues credited to my account, but supposing it
to be even as you say, it does not follow that I am qualified for
'leadership'. A popular chief should be possessed of a magnificent
bodily appearance, an iron frame, eloquence, or at least a ready
fluency of tongue. I have none of these. O'C. has them all-at least
in a degree. A popular leader should possess great animal courage,
contempt of pain and death, and be not altogether ignorant of arms and
military science. No chief or leader that has hitherto appeared in the
English movement has these qualifications, we have never had a B a r
bes for instance. In these qualifications I am decidedly deficient, I
know nothing of arms, have no stomach for fighting, and would rather
die after some other fashion than by bullet or rope. From a knowledge
of myself and all the men who have, and do figure in the Chartist
movement, I am convinced that even in this respect was O'C. thrown
overboard, we might go further and fare worse. Amongst my
revolutionary virtues you give me credit for '*energy'.* I know I do
possess a sort of energy, which when occasion demands enables me to
rouse others to exertion and direct their exertions, myself setting
the example, but this is *moral energy,* the physical energy which
makes Cromwells, Napoleons, etc I possess, I fear, not an atom of.
Placed in certain circumstances I should, I fear, fall like
Robespierre, through want of the necessary courage to save myself.
This is not all, the very qualities you give me the credit for
possessing, and which you emphatically sum up in the sentence 'You
are the *only* Englishman who is really free of *all* prejudices that
distinguish the Englishman from the Continental man', are sufficient
of themselves to prevent my being a leader. If I am 'the *only*
Englishman, etc.', it follows that I would be a chief without an
army, a leader without followers. To myself my proper position appears
clear, I am a 'pioneer', the teacher of 'strange doctrines', the
proclaimer of principles which startle the many, and are but timidly acknowledged even by the few; and the office of the pioneer is
surely useful, and as surely not inglorious. You see I am perfectly
candid, I speak of myself as perhaps few men would speak, but I wish
you not to be deceived, not to deceive yourself, not to deceive others. I am but one of the humble workers in the great movement of
progress, as such I desire to be consid­ ered.

The letter I am commenting on came to me through *W\[eerth\] opened.*
Now I have every confidence in *W.* but it is possible that, without
meaning any harm, some points of your letter might come to be known,
particularly as *W.* wrote me that he approved and agreed with all you
had said about my leadership. Now if what you did say had become known
it would place me in a very awkward position with O'C. I do not wish
to prevent you criticising O'C. in your letters, or any other person
(myself included), only I would wish that every necessary precaution
should be taken by you in transmitting your letters.

If you find fault with this egotism, this talk about myself, you have
only yourself to blame for it.

I now come to your letter of the 5th of March, which letter exists
not. it has *gone the way of all flesh,* in accordance with your
expressed wishes.

It is not necessary that I should go through all the points of your
(5th of March) letter seriatim. *1* cannot pretend to judge of the
policy and practicability of your scheme,[10] of these you and your
compatriots must be the best judges. For myself I have confidence in
your discretion as well as your zeal, and as far as my humble
abilities, and time will permit I am willing to aid you in the manner
you suggest, you bearing in mind what I have said of my own
deficiencies, and consequently that while competent to serve the cause
in some ways, I am not competent to do so in others. But before I
regularly commence the duties you expect of me, there is one point I
must be assured of,-namely,-that your scheme has the sanction of the
long-trusted, incorruptible, and martyr men of the German movement. I
must inform you that I have been a member of the German Societya for
some weeks past (several Englishmen have joined the Society lately
which adds to its members every week), now should your scheme not be
made known to the Society, or at least to one or two of its most
trusted members, I should hesitate to join you, because if your
arrange­ ments came to be known I should be placed in a false position, perhaps regarded as a conspirator against the popular interests. I have great faith in Schapper, and if he is not consulted I do not see how I could join you. But are you sure your scheme is not already known in London? I have acted as you directed, no one but myself knows the contents of your letter of the 5th March, but two or three weeks before that letter reached me, I heard that *you* (the literary
characters in Brussels) *had formed a society, confined to yourselves into which you admitted no working man.[11] * If by this society is meant the society respecting which you have written to me, you will
see that it is already known and has excited prejudice amongst the good men. If this 'society' be not your present scheme but something else, still whatever it may be it has excited prejudice here which you must endeavour to dispel before you can hope to have the views expressed in your 5th of March letter adopted by the Germans here. As regards *Weitling* he may have friends in the London Society, but certainly not the majority. *S.* is the man who leads, and properly
so. He repudiates 'leadership', but nature forms some men for chiefs and she has given him the necessary qualifications.

On Saturday[12] I received a long letter from you through Weerth, or rather two letters. The one for *The Northern Star*[13] I like very much, it will appear this week.\" I have altered the date from February 20 to March 20th, it will thereby not look so stale.

The private letter accompanying your public letter I read with much interest, the facts connected with France are very important, and down to the line you indicate I shall use them in *The Northern Star*[14] though perhaps not this week. Do not be surprised if I use those facts in a 'leader'. All that you say about the middle-class in England and France I fully accord with. All that you say about 'Merry England' is true. You say 'I am just in time to include some resolutions which we thought proper to pass against Cooper'.[15] There are no 'resolutions' in the letter I received from you.

A few words on the state of things in England. The anti-Corn Law agitation is drawing to a close. Whether or no Peel carries his measure through the Lords, the Corn Laws are doomed and the day of their final extinction is drawing nigh. Then comes complete middle-class domination, an increased agitation for the Charter, complete estrangement between the proletarians and the middle-class, and the beginning of that conflict which will be a social as well as a political one.

The Chartists as Chartists are doing nothing, the 'Chartist Convention' at Manchester, and the 'Chartist Message' resulted in nothing-a mere flash in the pan. The Land Society[16] goes on prospering, at least so I learn by the account of monies received, for I am not a member. Some land has been purchased and more will be almost immediately. The Land scheme may do as a passing experiment but
is unworthy of the energies of a national movement. I have told you that the German Society is advancing, I am glad that the report of their annual supper[17] pleased your friends. I have seen the German paper published in New York.[18] You will have seen that the 'Fraternal Democrats'[19] are progres­ sing. After a deal of trouble and
discouragement I think I shall succeed in this. We were for some time regarded with much prejudice and jealousy by the Chartists but this is wearing away. The Polish affair has done a good deal towards bringing this about. Seeing that no other party would move, we determined to begin. Our efforts excited the Chartist-Executive, who feared we would
take the popular leadership out of their hands. Hence they came to us. As soon as they came, we said 'You lead, we will follow'. Our policy is not to push ourselves, but our principles, and compel others to adopt them. Thus the two parties worked harmoniously, forming a joint committee to get up the meeting. To me was left the drawing up of the resolutions and petition, and I determined to make both ultra-democratic. I had all my own way in the Committee and at the public meeting the resolutions were passed *unanimously.* Schapper was received with great enthusiasm, and just in proportion as we were democratic in our sentiments we were applauded. Several Polish aristocrats present left the meeting in a rage, grinding their teeth, and denouncing me as a **sans-culotte** for my onslaught on them. The meeting was a glorious one, at least three thousand persons present. The humbugs (Lovett and Co.) were plotting to get up a *genteel Polish-nationality* meeting, when we stepped in and settled their hash for them. It is not likely that they will now hold a meeting at all. The meeting was reported in the *Times',[20] Chronicle, Advertiser,* *D. News, Globe,* and *Sun.* It was editorially praised by the *Advertiser,* and *Sun,* and denounced by the *Times,* and *D. News.* Did you see the *Times* denunciation? It was capital, especially as following within a few days a 'leader' in which the *Times* man had asserted that the 'delusion of Chartism' was dead and gone.[21] This meeting will be the commencement of a new era in English agitation, henceforth mere Chartism will not do, ultra democracy, social as well as political, will be the object of our propaganda. Tonight a meeting is to be holden in South London, but that of course will not be reported in the daily papers. I must conclude. Write again soon. I will myself write again in a week or two. Mary's love to Mrs E.[22] and yourself. Remember me to Marx, Gigot, etc.

Thine fraternally­

Julian

(Henceforth 'J.')