---
id: MECW38-160
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 22, 1851"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "22 March 1851"
year: 1851
publication: "First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38, p. 322"
status: raw
---

TO ENGELS[1] IN MANCHESTER

[London, 22 March 1851]

Dear Engels,

Above you will find the splendid document which I got Pieper to copy out for you. On the pretext of having guaranteed Mazzini's loan, Ruge is calling for money to be converted into 'public opinion'. Among the 'Prussians' here, Bücher, Eisner, Zimmermann, etc., there is great indignation at these 'vigorous provisionals'.

As for the 'six' who have caused you so much trouble,[2] those 6 were Landolphe and Blanc, Willich and Schapper, Barthélémy and Vidil, in a word, the 6 matadors; Hungarians, Poles, etc., the unconsulted mob, did not figure.

In the 3rd letter Willich is replying to nothing but the expression of his own thoughts.[3] *N'a reçu ni lettre ni rien de la part des Becker et des Schramm?*[4] Today will be an agreeable day for the lad. About a fortnight ago Wolff[5] encountered him in a whores' coffee house at 2 o'clock in the morning and loudly exclaimed: 'What? The virtuous Willich here?' Whereupon the virtuous one sloped off.

The actual contriver of the German central dodge[6] is the tireless, leathery Struve, bunion specialist and herbivore. All the fellow's up to is the old business of using cranioscopy, morality and suchlike trivialities to draw attention to himself. A quack, and one with a hoarse, laryngitical voice to boot. For the past 25 years the jackass has been writing a 'democratic political encyclopaedia' and a 'democratic universal history',[7] the first being nothing more than Welcker-Rotteck translated into Struvese, the second, Rotteck democratically paraphrased. And Ruge has sunk so low that only the compassion of the police prevented him from printing this nonsense in Germany.

That dim-witted Kinkel is good at ridding the philistines of their illusions. No better means of unmasking this jackass than for him to fall into the hands of such highly experienced harlequins as Struve and Ruge. In that company, at any rate, he'll lose his lion's skin.

Your

K. Marx

A few days ago Jones came to see me and, especially in view of the latest revelations, is congratulating himself on having been saved by me from taking part in the banquet.