---
id: MECW38-071
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, November 29, 1848"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "29 November 1848"
year: 1848
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38, p. 181; First published: abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, 1913 and in full in MEGA, 1929"
status: raw
---

*To Engels in Berne*

Dear Engels,

The papers have been sent to you. If this was not done sooner the fault lies with that jackass Korff who, because I was overworked, a circumstance aggravated by repeated summonses, has so far failed to carry out my orders.

In the meantime remain in Berne. I shall write to you as soon as you can come. Seal your letters better. One of them had been opened, as I indicated in the paper, without, of course, mentioning your name. [Marx, 'Letters Opened']

Write in detail about *Proudhon* and, since your geography is good, about the dirty business in Hungary (nations swarming like bees). [Engels, Proudhon and The Magyar Struggle] Don't forget me [i.e., The Poverty of Philosophy] in the piece on Proudhon, since our articles are reprinted by a great many French newspapers.

Write something, too, attacking the Federal Republic, to which end Switzerland provides the best opportunity. [Engels, The National Council]

K. Heinzen has published his old trashy piece attacking us. [K. Heinzen, Die Helden des teutschen Kommunismus, 1848]

Our paper continues to stand by the principle of *émeute* [uprising], but despite all my summonses in court, it has succeeded in sailing clear of the *Code pénal*.[1] It is now very much en vogue. We are also issuing posters daily.[2] *La révolution marche*. Write diligently.

I have devised an infallible plan for extracting money from your old man, as we now have none. Write me a begging letter (as crude as possible), in which you retail your past vicissitudes, but in such a way that I can pass it on to your mother. The old man's beginning to get the wind up.

I hope to see you again soon.

Your
Marx