---
id: MECW38-240
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Freiligrath, December 27, 1851"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "27 December 1851"
year: 1851
publication: "Source: *Marx Engels on Literature and Art*, Progress Publishers, 1976"
status: raw
---

December 27, 1851

Moorish Prince,

Enclosed is a letter from Ebner.

Today I also received another letter from Weydemeyer. Among other things he writes:

"A few days ago a delegate arrived from the London Agitation Union to oppose the Kinkel loans. These people probably imagine that here in America, everybody is split into pro-Kinkel and anti-Kinkel factions, because a handful of fugitives have made much ado about nothing. The Kossuth sensation long ago made Kinkel a forgotten man and the few thousand dollars which he collects are not in fact worth all the fuss.

"I can in any case look after the sale of the *Revue* for you here. A few more of Freiligrath's new poems could also be accommodated here."

After W[eydemeyer] has given us another push he writes:

"But first and foremost a Freiligrath poem: that is the greatest attraction."

Take this to heart and concoct a New Year song to the New World. Under the present circumstances I believe it is really easier to write in verse than in prose, be it heavy or light-hearted. Incidentally, if you ever attempt to turn the humour that is peculiar to your African majesty in private life into artistic form, I am certain you would play a role in this genre too, for, as your wife has rightly noted, you are a sly one underneath.