---
id: MECW38-013
title: "Letter to Heinrich Heine, March 24, 1845"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "24 March 1845"
year: 1845
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38, p. 30; First published: in Archiv für die Geschichte des Sozialismus und der Arbeiterbewegung, jg. 9, Leipzig, 1921"
status: raw
---

*To Heine in Paris*

This letter was first published in English in full in *The Letters of Karl Marx*, selected and translated with explanatory notes and an introduction by Saul K. Padover, Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliff, New Jersey, 1979.

Dear Heine,

If I write you no more than a few lines today, you must excuse me on the grounds of the multifarious vexations I have had with the Customs.

Püttmann in Cologne has requested me to ask you if you couldn't possibly send a few poems (perhaps also your *German fleet*?) for the *Jahrbüch* [Rheinische Jahrbücher] in Darmstadt, a periodical *not subject to censorship*. You can address the material to me. The latest date — but you'll probably have something immediately to hand — is 3 weeks hence. My wife sends her cordial regards to yourself and your wife. [Mathilde] The day before yesterday, I went to the local Administration de la sûret publique, [police headquarters] where I had to state in writing that here in Belgium I would publish nothing about current politics.

Renouard and Börnstein have had your *Wintermärchen* printed in Paris, New York being given as the place of publication, and have offered it for sale here in Brussels. This pirated edition is said, in addition, to be teeming with printer's errors. More another time.

Yours