---
id: MECW38-177
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, May 19, 1851"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "19 May 1851"
year: 1851
publication: "First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. I, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38, pp. 356-359"
status: raw
---

To Marx in London

[Manchester,] Monday, 19 May 1851

Dear Marx,

I'm glad that nothing untoward happened to the letters, it's always better thus. The postmaster here also gave me a satisfactory explanation for the late arrival of the letter. In future, when writing the address, put street and number *above* the name of the town, so that 'Manchester' is right at the bottom. It's what the post office clerks are used to and, because the name of the street was at the bottom, they overlooked the 'Manchester' in that particular letter and sent it back to London as a local London letter.

The latest is that you have been utterly worsted. You believe you have discovered the correct theory of land rent. You believe you are the first to demolish Ricardo's theory. *Malheureux que tu es*:[1] you have been outflanked, destroyed, beaten, overwhelmed, the whole foundation of your *monumentum aere perennius*[2] has crumbled away. Hearken: Mr Rodbertus has just brought out the third volume of his *Sociale Briefe an v. Kirchmann*—18 sheets. This volume contains a 'complete refutation of Ricardo's doctrine of land rent and the exposition of a new theory of rent'—last week's Leipzig *Illustrierte Zeitung*.[3] That's cooked your goose for you!

The great Kinkel's efforts to extricate himself from the disreputable society known as the European Committee without getting into bad odour are most entertaining.[4] You'll have seen in Saturday's *Sun*[5] that a handful of wailing democrats have succeeded in organising a meeting and some little riots near Elberfeld, at which they distributed these proclamations. This was made possible through German-Catholic connections[6] of Ronge's. Neither Kinkel nor any other member of the chorus would have done anything there.

The Cavaignac business is unfortunate in all respects; if Girardin regards him as having the best prospects, it must be true. Besides, the fellows are coming increasingly to realise that a revision[7] is impossible—by legal means. And, if illegal, it would be a *coup d'état*, and whoever first embarks on *coups d'état* will be crushed, the *Débats*[8] declares. Napoleon is beginning to grow *horriblement* threadbare. Changarnier's done for, permanently pensioned off; however nice coalition may be, it can have no immediate practical results—*il n'y a que Cavaignac*.[9] Whether or not the fellow postpones the revolution would after all be of no great moment; a few years of determined industrial development, a crisis surmounted and a new era of prosperity could do no harm at all, particularly if accompanied by bourgeois reforms in France, etc. But in France Cavaignac and bourgeois reform mean tariff reform and an alliance with England and, at the first opportunity, war against the Holy Alliance,[10] with English help, with due time to arm, with a long prepared invasion of Germany, and that might cost us the Rhine frontier which is, in any case, the best means of quieting *crapaud*[11] socialism with a part-payment in *gloire*.[12]

The *Débats*, by the way, has fallen so low that it sees no salvation for society except in upholding the new electoral law.[13]

The Faucher and Meyen affair is truly splendid. All I have seen of the German *Illustrated London News* is the front page of the first number in a shop window, so I was rather curious to know who the 'leading German writers' of this pompous nonsense might be.

The *Frankfurter Journal* purports to have heard from Cologne[14] that things are now tolerable for the refugees in London, with the exception of those in the barracks, amongst whom is Willich. The Augsburg *Allgemeine* actually believes that the Aliens Bill[15] is still in force and pictures the refugees—those Wandering Jews of the nineteenth century—creeping round London in mortal terror of this Bill.

I'll say nothing about the Portuguese revolution.[16] Except how remarkable it is that, as a purely *individual* insurgent, as *ôte-toi de là, Costa Cabral, que je m'y mette*,[17] Saldanha should have achieved absolutely nothing, but that from the moment he was compelled to ally himself with the liberal bourgeoisie of Oporto and bring to his side an omnipotent representative of this bourgeois power in the person of Manuel[18] Passos, the whole army should then have rallied to him. The position accorded to Passos, and what happens next, will show whether or not Saldanha and the Queen[19] will immediately set about trying to cheat the bourgeoisie again. Lisbon is nothing, Oporto being the centre of the constitutional bourgeoisie, of Portugal's Manchester School.[20]

You can thank your stars that Mr Goegg didn't call on you. *Le diable emporte toutes ces médiocrités gonflées.*[21]

Your

F. E.