---
id: MECW38-035
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, November 2, 1846"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "2 November 1846"
year: 1846
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38 p. 88; First published: in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, 1913."
status: raw
---

*To Marx in Brussels*

This is a postscript by Engels to the letter Bernays wrote to Marx on 2 November 1846 (see text of the letter in MEGA2, Abt. III, Bd. 2, S. 62-63).

Where is the long letter you promised so long ago? *Make sure you send Bernays the manuscript*, he only needs what you have[1] since he still has the printed stuff. He has sent nothing to America; whatever may have appeared there was printed without his knowledge or consent. [K. L. Bernays, Das entschleierte Geheimniss der Criminal-Justiz. Eine kommunistische Anschauungsweise, Der Volks-Tribun, 27 June and 4 July 1846] However a lot of copies were printed, and some may have gone as presents from Leske to all points of the compass. We shall investigate the matter. Perhaps through Grün or Börnstein. I have written to Switzerland about the manuscripts, [reference to The German Ideology] but it would seem that the cur [J. M. Schläpter] has no intention of replying.[2] Apart from him, there's no one but Jenni; I've played a prank on him and would rather not write, enclose a short note for the fellow in your next. I shall send it on, but it's only for form's sake, the fellow's almost certain to refuse. The first man wrote to published a short pamphlet by Bernays [Rothschild. Ein Urtheilsspruch vom menschlichen Standpunkte aus], but even if he does take the thing, it would appear, *à ce qu'écrit* Püttmann, that he is bankrupt. *Voilà*. I despair of Switzerland. Good advice costs money. Things being what they are, we shall certainly not get rid of 2 volumes together. At most 2 volumes to 2 different publishers. Write about this as well.

Your
E.

I have only just read what the little man [Karl Ludwig Bernays] has written above about his flight from solitude. It's a good thing we've got him here. He is gradually cheering up again. Greetings to the whole *boutique*.