---
id: MECW38-155
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, March 8, 1851"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "8 March 1851"
year: 1851
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38"
status: raw
---

TO ENGELS IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 8 March[1] 1851

Dear Engels,

No more than a MATTER OF FACT line or two today.

As you will have seen, *The Times* didn't accept the stuff.[2] Mais ça ne nous regarde plus.[3]

Harney had already written to Schramm the day before yesterday morning. That idle jackass went out at 9 in the morning and didn't return home until one o'clock at night. So he did not find the letter till yesterday.

Harney is publishing his statement.[4] Has written a satisfactory introduction to it. Addresses Schramm as 'DEAR Schramm' and reminds him that he too must abide by his obligations and not have recourse to the POLICE COURT—this document is aimed at the French.

Yesterday the *Patrie*[5] (and today the *Constitutionnel*) carried a statement by Messrs Blanc, Barthélémy, Schapper, Willich and all the rest of the committee, in which these gentlemen declare that Blanqui had not sent the toast to any member of the committee. The *Patrie's* comment is that it had not wished to print the statement without first making inquiries. Whereupon it had been informed by Mr Antoine—Blanqui's brother-in-law—that the toast had been dispatched to Barthélémy, one of the co-signatories, who had acknowledged receipt of same. You can imagine the lamentations in that camp!

Mais ce n'est pas tout.[6]

Yesterday morning, then, Wolff[7] sent Wolff, in company with a real live Englishman, to see Landolphe. The fellow behaved like a discountenanced Grec,[8] first lamenting, declaiming, vapouring, expostulating, arms and legs all over the place, and then relapsing into a state of total and ineffectual pusillanimity. Will be placed on record this evening before the miserable crapauds[9] of Church Street.[10]

Finally, bad news from my mater. She has made everything dependent on Bommel.[11] I shall probably have to hazard a coup de désespoir![12]

Your
K. Marx

I have received Willich's letters from Becker.[13] You will get them on Tuesday.