---
id: MECW38-257
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, December 17, 1851"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: "Jenny von Westphalen"
written: "17 December 1851"
year: 1851
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38, pg 562; Publisher: International Publishers (1975); First Published: Marx and Engels, Works, Second Russian edition, Vol 27, Moscow, 1962; Translated: P"
status: raw
---

*To Frederick Engels in Manchester*

Dear Mr Engels,

Moor has just asked me to send you in great haste a few words in reply to Weydemeyer's letter, just received. He will himself let you have an article on the French misère by Friday and wonders whether you might not be able to dispatch to America a humorous essay on the German nonsense, notably the hearing of Prussia by Austria, etc. I am also, on the orders of the powers that be, sending Freiligrath a reminder. We all look forward very much to seeing you here soon. Colonel Musch and the young ladies, his sisters, send you their warm regards as does your

Jenny Marx

Dear Mr Engels,

Hardly hall I posted my letter to you (yours not having arrived until four o'clock in the afternoon) when Moor returned from the Museum and began 'burning his fingers' over the French stuff. Now he asks me to send you at once this second epistle to tell you that, as he would not be able to Post his article until late on Thursday evening, he proposes to send it off from here, and that, supposing you were in fact to leave on Friday, everything would cross. If you can send your article here by Friday, it could travel in company with the rest; but you might consider it preferable to send yours off from Liverpool. So *comme il vous plaira.* How do you like my husband creating a stir with your article throughout western, eastern and southern America—and mutilated at that, and what's more under another name? For the rest the whole article is nothing but a source of mystification.

Should you have the English version of the *Manifesto* to hand, please bring it with you. Colonel Musch writes three letters a day to Frederick in Manchester, sticking used stamps thereon with the utmost conscientiousness. The whole tribe sends its love. Until Saturday, then.

Farewell.

Yours

Jenny Marx