---
id: MECW38-185
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, June 27, 1851"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "27 June 1851"
year: 1851
publication: "First published in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

[Manchester,] 27 June 1851

Dear Marx,

It is very *bonasse*;[1] of the good Saxon police actually to inform us themselves of what we did not previously know or could not have discovered. Burgers' didactically dignified circular letter with the familiar *clair-obscur*[2] of its reasoning must have cost them much fruitless brain-racking[3] they even picked out all the wrong passages for printing in bold. A pretty figure the great Windmillers[4] cut now, thrown out of their own party before the eyes of the whole world, the great Willich bracketed with Haude, Gebert and other such unknown rabble, with a certain 'Schopper' (derived from 'Schoppen')[5] whose rare services are so little known that even in *Cologne* they can't print his name correctly! So FAR ALL RIGHT. But Article I of the Rules bodes ill for the arrested men: 'all methods of revolutionary activity', or however it goes.[6] It removes the business from the sphere of mere prohibited association to that of high treason. To judge, by the way, from an allusion in the *Kölnische Zeitung*, I would seem to be right in supposing that the intention is to arraign the whole company in Berlin before the State tribunal which is to be brought into being specifically for this grandiose occasion.

The utter failure of the government's attempt to make a bogy out of the great Dresden disclosure augurs well for the mood of the bourgeoisie. So little terror does the red spectre now hold for the bourgeois that he refuses to listen to talk of a big communist plot and is already beginning to fear that the system of house searches will ere long be extended to himself.

Not a single paper has taken the bait and the government's frantic endeavour to discover further machinations in gymnastic societies, 'free communities'[7] and among democratically-minded master tailors proves, on the one hand, how much it is vexed by the indifference of the bourgeoisie whose curiosity it is seeking to whet, and, on the other, how little the Rules and the circular letter have led to further disclosures. It would seem that Miquel's house also was searched in vain.

*Qu'y a-t-il de nouveau a Londres?*[8]

Your

F. E.