---
id: MECW38-110
title: "Letter to Julius Schuberth, Theodor Hagen and Stephen Adolph Naut, March 4, 1850"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "4 March 1850"
year: 1850
publication: "First published: in Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow 1934 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38, p. 228-229"
status: raw
---

TO JULIUS SCHUBERTH IN HAMBURG

AND THEODOR HAGEN AND STEPHAN ADOLPH NAUT IN COLOGNE

[Draft]

[London,] 4 March 1850

1. Schuberth. Letter answered. The 2nd issue[1] must, as promised, not cost more than the first. As regards the 450 copies, no change can now be made for the first quarter. For the 2nd he should put forward proposals. The arrangement for Köhler's payment has nothing to do with this.

What Schuberth says about success contradicts his earlier information and our reports.

In future nothing to be set aside without asking us. For the 3rd issue 'To Die for the Republic'[2] can stand.

50 copies to be sent here. The correspondence from South Germany[3] no longer to be used.[4]

2. Hagen. Same as Schuberth. Should organise proper supervision of the printer[5] and also obtain from the latter a certificate *re* number of copies.[6] The correspondence from South Germany no longer to be used.

He should vigorously oppose the censor's presumption and place his name on the title page as the responsible editor.[7]

Should section IV of *The Campaign for the German Imperial Constitution* create difficulties, this should be reported at once.

3. Naut. Terms for printer—price as in Hamburg; for Eisen: 25 per cent for Cologne, 50 per cent for all other copies, incl. all expenses, excepting, perhaps, postage from London and advertisements ordered by us.

The printer must deliver 5 sheets in 10 days and fix penalty for breach of contract.