---
id: MECW38-133
title: "Letter to Friedrich Engels, January 22, 1851"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "22 January 1851"
year: 1851
publication: "First published: abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929 Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected "
status: raw
---

TO ENGELS IN MANCHESTER

[London,] 22 January 1851

Dear Engels,

You are *taciturne comme la mort*![1] Enclosed I send you 1) a statement by Oswald Dietz in the Basle *National-Zeitung* against Pfänder and Bauer,[2] 2) a tattling article against us concocted by Mr A. Ruge in company with Struve and Willich.[3] You must return the garbage to me within two days at the latest, telling me what action you think we should take against No. 2. If you would like to draft some sort of statement, send it along as well. C. Schramm is going to issue his own statement.

What do you think of this *coup de maître*.[4] by Atta Troll[5] and, entrenched behind him, that 'outstanding, resolute man, Struve', not to speak of the 'valiant Willich'. *C'est un peu fort*[6] I happened to light upon the paper at Bamberger's. Who else would either read or know of the *Bremer Tages-Chronik. Organ der Demokratie*?

Bauer and Pfänder naturally won't answer and silence would, indeed, seem to be the most advisable course for them just now. I have as yet had no news, either from Schabelitz, who wished to take over our *Revue*[7] or from Becker, who was going to see to the publication of my essays.[8] None of my approaches to Mr Schuberth have so far been of any avail. If Haupt can find a lawyer who will take over the case, he will bring an action against him.[9]

What are Mary and Lizzy[10] doing? And above all you yourself? Harney was here one evening with Pieper, Eccarius, etc., and very gay, until his 'dear spouse'[11] —'half drew she him, half sank he in'[12] —carried him off almost by force.

Your

K. M.