---
id: MECW38-195
title: "Letter to Karl Marx, about August 1, 1851"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "1 August 1851"
year: 1851
publication: "First published slightly abridged in *Der Briefwechsel zwischen F. Engels und K. Marx*, Bd. 1, Stuttgart, 1913 and in full in MEGA, Abt. III, Bd. 1, 1929 Printed according to the original Published in"
status: raw
---

TO MARX IN LONDON

[Manchester, about 1 August 1851]

Dear Marx,

Enclosed the 2nd half of the 5 pound note.

I didn't know that Schramm had gone off to Paris.[1] You had told me nothing about it. Hence it was with the utmost astonishment that I read in the *Kölnische Zeitung* that he had been drowned—it can't, alas, be true. The cur is very obtrusive—we have allowed him to become too familiar—and he's a complete blackguard. However, you're perfectly right in saying that protests and recriminations are useless; we must just leave the fellow to go his own way until we have him in our power. As I said, it would have been quite a good thing if he really had been drowned in the Channel; but as likely as not he spread the rumour himself—c'est *une manière comme une autre de faire parler de* soi.[2]

So Weydemeyer's going to America to see whether he can take over the New York *Arbeiterzeitung* presently being run by Fenner von Fenneberg. If he can stay in New York he will be more useful to us there than in London, where the *embarras*[3] would only be made worse. A reliable chap like him is just what we've been wanting in New York and after all, New York isn't the back of beyond and with Weydemeyer one can be sure that, *le cas échéant*[4] he would immediately be to hand.

The lithographic correspondence[5] scheme is quite a good one. Only you must keep it completely under your hat. Should little Bamberger[6] and others ever get hold of the idea, they would immediately steal a march on you. As soon as the initial arrangements have been made I should, if I were you, advertise in the German-American papers and, indeed, sign the thing myself, as director, to give it appeal. If it can be done on your responsibility and you think it might help in some way to name me as collaborator, you are, of course, entirely at liberty to do so. If, however, you want to keep your name out of the affair, although I see absolutely no need for this, *car enfin*,[7] why shouldn't you, too, be entitled to set up an industrial firm and carry on the *Neue Rheinische Zeitung* in lithograph—the man to set up the firm is Lupus. In this connection Weydemeyer could be of great service to you in New York, especially as regards the collection of money, which is the main thing. I'm convinced the thing will have enormous appeal and that the many American correspondents in London, etc., will soon become aware of it.

If you name yourself as a director there can be no question but that the thing will attract more custom, and this right from the outset; if you choose to name only Lupus, there's no longer any moral responsibility, and his Silesian tirades *à la* Luther, which are very well suited to the German Americans,—better than your style, which compels them to think—can be given free rein.[8] In any case you must make a point of writing as badly and as *décousu*[9] as possible, otherwise you'd soon be in hot water with your readers.

What's this new thing of Proudhon's you mention?[10]

I shall write a signed article for Jones;[11] I only wish that he would send me as complete a run as possible of his *Notes*,[12] which isn't to be had here. What is his address? I've forgotten it.

From America, too, reports on the cotton goods trade sound bad. The markets are OVERSTOCKED, and the YANKEES themselves are producing too much, given the present state of the market.

Write again soon, I am bored to death here.

Your

F. E.

N.B. Always keep your papers well away from home; for some time now I've been under very close observation here and can't move a step without having 2-3 INFORMERS at my heels. Mr Bunsen will not have missed the opportunity of providing the British government with new and important disclosures about how dangerous we are.[13]