---
id: MECW38-197
title: "Letter to Wilhelm Wolff, August 6, 1851"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Friedrich Engels
written: "6 August 1851"
year: 1851
publication: "First published in: *Marx and Engels, Works*, First Russian Edition, Vol. XXV, Moscow, 1934. Printed according to the original Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, V"
status: raw
---

TO WILHELM WOLFF IN LONDON

Manchester, 6 August 1851

Dear Lupus,

I shall make inquiries here about Mr Kendall this very day, and let you know tomorrow what I find out about him. Were I to approach him myself at this stage, before he has given you an answer, and some indication that he is considering you, the only result would be that he would dismiss me very coolly and with inadequate information. These GENTLEMEN are extremely formal. Not long ago Hain also applied to this same Kendall for a post and promptly mentioned my name, yet Kendall did not think it worth the trouble to approach me for information about him-if, *after* this incident, I were to importune Kendall, this could only do you harm. As soon as you have an answer from Kendall, let me know and tell me what he writes; I'll then at once go to him and find out everything I can, and shall do my best to make him well disposed towards you. Of course, if it were not for Hassenpflug's warrants against you, you would be engaged straight away. But even so, all will probably be well. If I could somehow procure you a position here it would be splendid, but unfortunately I have too few acquaintances in this LINE, and only in modern languages is there permanent employment for private tutors, and of these there are enough. I shall see, by the way, about setting Watts in motion-the fellow is in the EDUCATIONAL MOVEMENT[1] and now has a mass of connections.

Your

F. E.

In future, wet the glue on your ENVELOPES more thoroughly-your letter arrived open.