---
id: MECW38-121
title: "Letter to Karl Blind, July 17, 1850"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "17 July 1850"
year: 1850
publication: "First published: in German in *International Review for Social History*, Vol. IV, 1939. Published in English for the first time in Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38, pp. 239-240"
status: raw
---

[Rough copy]

London, 17 July 1850

64 Dean Street, Soho

Dear Blind,

Our long silence was due to a misunderstanding. For we believed that the Central Authority's second circular[1] had been brought you 6 weeks or 2 months ago [by] our emissary, Klein, and we were waiting for your answer. [Now] it transpires that Klein has [brought] back nothing of the kind to Brussels.

Write to me as soon as possible and in a special enclosure to the [Central Authority]. We are thinking of convening a congress here in a few (8) weeks' time.[2] What do you [make] of the Holstein business?[3] We shall shortly be dispatching an emissary [who] worked there for two years and knows [exactly] who is who and what is what.[4]

Concerning my own fortunes and the manifold vicissitudes which I [...] in, some other time.

I am approaching you this time about a private matter [...], that, if at all possible, you will not refuse me your assistance. I had arranged with my family that I would settle my financial affairs with my uncle Philips in Holland [...] weeks, [for which] purpose I was to visit Holland in person. An [...] illness of my wife constantly rendered my departure impossible. And now I shall not be able to go there for several weeks, because two of my uncle's daughters are being married, one after the other, from his house, so th[at] business matters cannot be settled till several weeks later.

With this affair in mind, I meanwhile drew a bill for £20 (500 fr.) with a [merchant] firm[5] here in London on the strength of this arrangement. The bill matures on Monday or Wednesday.[6] If I were unable to pay it, I would lay myself open to a public [...] which, given the present state of the parties here, and [my] relations with the Prussian Embassy and the English Ministry, [could] have most disagreeable consequences.

Now I hear that *Goegg* in Paris has a considerable amount of capital available just now. Would you write to him immediately, explaining the circumstances to him and inquiring whether he could advance me the money on a promissory note or a bill. *Periculum in mora.*[7]

Pending the arrangement in Holland I am, in the literal sense of the word, *dépourvu*,[8] save for my last shilling.

I rely on you to do your utmost.

Your

K. Marx