---
id: MECW38-106
title: "Letter to Ferdinand Freiligrath, January 11, 1850"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: Karl Marx
written: "11 January 1850"
year: 1850
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38, p. 224-225; Published in English for the first time in Marx and Engels, Works, First Russian Edition, 1934"
status: raw
---

TO FERDINAND FREILIGRATH IN COLOGNE

London, 11 January [1850]

Dear Freiligrath,

Today I am writing you just a couple of lines on an urgent matter.

Both for our *Revue* and for its gradual transformation into a fortnightly and weekly and, if circumstances permit, back into a daily newspaper—and also for our other propagandist interests—we need money. Money is to be had only in America, where all the semi-revolutionaries—e.g. a certain Anneke who did an ignominious bunk in the Palatinate, thereby proving that he's not even a soldier—are now plucking the golden apples.

We have therefore decided to send C. Schramm to America forthwith, as our emissary. For the lengthy journey we have in mind we need at least 150 *talers*. While requesting you to collect contributions to that end with the utmost possible dispatch, we would at the same time request you to send by return letters of introduction for C. Schramm, manager of the *N.Rh.Z.* (restored to our party as a result of his daring escape from the *Wesel* fortress).

I have also written to G. Jung about the money matter.[1]

Awaiting an early reply.

Your

K. Marx

The Chartists and French *réfugiés* here are also giving mandates to our emissary. This is a League[2] matter. It is essential, my dear Freiligrath, that in your letter of introduction, you leave no doubt about the position of the *N.Rh.Z.* in Germany and its revolutionary significance.