---
id: MECW38-253
title: "Letter to Joseph Weydemeyer, June 20, 1850"
volume: 38
doc_type: letter
author: "Jenny von Westphalen"
written: "20 June 1850"
year: 1850
publication: "Source: Marx-Engels Collected Works, Volume 38, pg 559; Publisher: International Publishers (1975); First Published: MECW, First Russian Edition, Moscow, 1934; Translated: Peter and Betty Ross"
status: raw
---

*To Joseph Weydemeyer in Frankfurt Am Main*

Dear Mr Weydemeyer,

My husband is not a little astonished that you could send the money to Naut, and likewise that from the red number to anyone but himself.

There will, of course, have to be a complete overhaul of the way in which the *Revue* is distributed. Meanwhile my husband requests you not to send anything more to Mr Naut, but rather all of it here, even the smallest amount (in Prussian talers). Conditions here are not as they are in Germany. We live, all six of us, in one small room and a very small closet, for which we pay more than for the largest house in Germany, and pay weekly at that. Hence you can imagine what a position one finds oneself in if so much as 1 Reichstaler arrives a day too late. For all of us here, without exception, it's a question of our daily bread. So do not await Mr Naut's orders and so forth. Another thing my husband wishes me to say is that it is really is not desirable for Luning to write a critique, a strong attack would do, only no praise. Nor has my husband ever expected a profound critique, but only a straightforward piece such as all newspapers accord to reviews and pamphlets, and what your paper also does when it wants to make works known and promote them, namely, publish short excerpts of a suitable kind. This involves little work.

Many regards to your dear wife, and my cordial regards to yourself.

Yours
Jenny Marx